PART I 

THE SENSEI 1 AND I 
1 

I never called him anything else, so I will write 
about him here only as the sensei without men- 
tioning his name, not because of any hesitation in 
doing so, but simply because the sensei comes natu- 
rally to my mind when I think of him. As for his 
initial I could never bring myself to resort to such 
an unfeeling manner of designating him. 

It was in Kamakura that we first met. I was a 
young student then. A friend who was staying 
there during the vacation asked me to come and 
spend a few days with him, and after waiting two 
or three days to raise the extra money, I went. But 
scarcely three days after I arrived, my friend received 
a telegram from home, ordering him to return at 
once. The telegram stated that his mother was seri- 
ously ill, but my friend hardly believed it. He had 
already been urged to marry by his parents, and this 
according to his modern ways of thinking, was dis- 
tasteful because of his extreme youth. Besides, he 
did not like the girl herself. So he had been idling 
near Tokyo, though he ought to have been at home 

1 A Japanese word for teacher. But even the professors of a univer- 
sity are called sensei by the students. 


2 


KOKORO 


during the vacation* He showed me the telegram 
asking me what he should do* How should 1 know ? 
But if his mother was really ill, there was nothing 
to do but return to the country* So he finally de- 
cided to go, and 1 was left alone* 

There was some time before school opened, and 
since I could remain in Kamakura or return to Tokyo 
at will, I decided to stay on in the lodgings we oc- 
cupied. For my friend, though his father was a man 
of considerable property in Chugoku, differed little 
from me in his way of living during his student days. 
So even after his return home I was able to keep my 
room and avoid the trouble of finding another. 

The lodging was in an out-of-the-way comer in 
Kamakura. We could not reach such fashionable 
enjoyments as billiards or ice-cream without travers- 
ing a long lane between the rice-fields, and it cost 
twenty sen to go by rickshaw. But there were many 
private villas in the neighbourhood, and being near 
the seashore, 1 found it very pleasant and convenient 
for swimming. Every day I went to the seashore to 
bathe, going down to the beach between the soot- 
covered, straw-thatched houses. There were so 
many people on the sand that one wondered where 
all the town people stayed. Sometimes the sea was 
thronged with black heads like a public bath. 1 
knew no one, but the gaiety of the place wrapped 
me up comfortably, and I was delighted as I stretched 
myself on the sand, and jumped about, my knees 
beaten by the surf. 


THE SENSEI AND 1 


3 


It was amidst this lively scene that I found the 
sensei . There were two bathing-booths on the shore, 
but I picked out one of them haphazard and made it 
my head-quarters. Unlike those who had grand 
villas about Hase, the summer visitors in this part 
were obliged to use these public-booths. In them 
they deposited their hats and parasols, washed their 
salty bodies, hung their bathing-dresses to dry, drank 
tea, rested and chatted. Though I had no bathing- 
dress, I left my things in the booth, where they 
would be safe while I enjoyed myself bathing. 


2 

When I saw the sensei in the booth, he was just 
about to take his things off, in preparation for a 
bathe. I, on the contrary, was walking from the 
shore, enjoying the fresh breeze as it dried my wet 
body. There were a crowd of black heads between us. 
Without some lucky chance I should have missed 
my sensei. In spite of the bustling crowd on the 
shore, and of my relaxed inattentiveness, my notice 
was drawn to my sensei at once, because he was with 
a foreigner. The moment the exceedingly white skin 
of that foreigner made its appearance in the booth, 
my attention was fixed upon him. He wore a real 
Japanese yukata , 1 which he took off and threw upon 
a bench in a bathhouse. He then crossed his arms 


1 A kind of kimono worn by men and women in summer* 


HH25 tm " ‘ ‘ [ s 



I kokoro 

md stood facing the sea. He had nothing on except 
the short drawers which we wore, and this in itself 
struck me as strange. Two days before I had gone 
to Yuigahama, where I lolled for a long time on the 
sand, watching foreigners swim. My seat on a little 
mound commanded a view of the entrance to the 
hotel, where men were preparing for their dip, but 
none of them, either coming or going, exposed waist 
or arms or legs. The women, in particular, were 
careful to hide their bodies, and most of them wore 
rubber caps, which could be seen bobbing up and 
down in the water like so many red, green, or blue 
leaves. Fresh from this introduction to foreign 
methods of bathing, I was surprised at this man s 

indifference to exposing his body. 

Presently he turned to the Japanese beside him 
who was stooping to pick up a towel which had 
fallen on the sand, and said a word or two. The 
Japanese wrapped his head in the towel as soon as 
he caught it, and began to walk towards the sea. 
That man was the sensei . 

I watched those two walking down the shore 
together from mere curiosity. They stepped into 
the waves at once, and passing through the multitude 
who were screaming near the shore, went further 
out to a considerably less crowded part, and began 
to swim. Their heads moved rapidly toward the 
open sea till they looked very small. Then they 
. made straight for the shore, and as they returned to 
the booth, without the usual cold well water bath, 


THE SENSEI AND I 5 

wiped their bodies dry, put on their clothes, and 
quickly went away, no one knew where. 

At that time I had nothing to worry me, but I 
was rather lonely and wanted some adventure. So 
the next day at the same time, I went to the booth 
again. This time the sensei came alone, wearing a 
straw hat. He took his spectacles off and put them 
on the bench, and at once wrapping his head in the 
towel, went quickly down to the sea. As he passed 
through the noisy bathers, and began to swim all 
alone, suddenly I was possessed by the desire to 
follow him. I splashed into the shallow water until 
it covered my head, as I tried to reach a deeper part, 
and soon was swimming in pursuit of the sensei. 
But contrary to the course yesterday, he struck out 
for the shore, making a clear sweep, and my plan 
was spoiled. He was already dressed and was leav- 
ing the booth, as I reached it waving my dripping 
hands, 

3 

The next day I went to the seashore at the same 
hour, and saw him. It was the same the day after. 
But there was no opportunity for speech or saluta- 
tion between us. Besides, the sensei’s attitude was 
unsociable. Always he came at the same hour, 
quite alone, and went away, never taking any notice 
of the others. He seemed to pay almost no atten- 
tion at all to his surroundings, however gay they 


6 


KOKORO 


might be. The tall body of the foreigner who had 
come with him on the first day was never seen there 
again. The sensei always came alone. 

Once he ran nimbly up the shore from the surf 
as usual, and was going to put on his yukata which 
he had thrown on the accustomed bench, when he 
discovered that it had somehow become covered 
with grains of sand. The sensei turned round and 
shook it, then the spectacles which he had placed 
under it slipped down through a crevice in the bench. 
It was not until he fastened hekoobi 1 around his shi- 
rogasuri 2 yukata that he discovered his loss, and sud- 
denly began to search for them everywhere. But his 
search did not last long, for I thrust my head and 
hand under the bench, and picked them up. The 
sensei took them from my hand, with a “ Thank 
you.” 

The day after, I followed the sensei and jumped 
into the sea, and swam with him in the same direc- 
tion. As we were about two hundred and fifty 
yards from the shore, the sensei turned back and 
spoke to me. There was nobody there floating on 
the wide, blue sea except us two. And the strong 
rays of the sun were beating down upon the water 
and the hills as far as eye could reach. I stretched 
my muscles with a sense of liberty and joy, and 
jumped and danced furiously in the water. Then 



THE SENSEI AND I 7 

the sensei stopped exercising his arms and legs and 
lay on his back on the waves. I followed his ex- 
ample, looking up into the deep blue sky which daz- 
zled my eyes. “ This is delightful, isn’t it? ” 1 
cried aloud. 

Presently the sensei, who changed his posture 
as one about to stand in the water, said, “ Let us go 
home.” Being full of life, I wanted to have a longer 
swim. But when the sensei invited me to go back, 
I readily complied. And we two took the same 
route back toward the shore. 

After that we became friends, but I did not yet 
know where he was staying. 

I think it happened on the afternoon of the 
third day after this. When I met the sensei at the 
booth, he asked me suddenly, “ Are you going to 
stay here for a long time ? ” Lacking forethought, 
I was not ready to answer such a question. So all 
I could say was, “ I don’t know.” But as I looked 
at the sensei’s smiling face, I felt suddenly ashamed, 
and could not help asking, “ And you, sensei ? ” This 
was the first time that the word sensei had passed 
my lips. 

I called at his lodgings that night. It was not 
an inn, but one of those villa-like buildings in the 
vast yard of a temple. I understood that the people 
who lived there were not those of his family. As 
I called him sensei again and again, he smiled bitterly. 
I apologized saying that it was my custom to address 
my seniors in this way. I asked him about that 


8 kokoro 

foreigner. The sensei described to me his eccentric 
ways, and told me he was not in Kamakura then, and 
many other things about him. He added that he 
felt it strange that he, who had very few acquain- 
tances even among the Japanese, should become 
friendly with this foreigner. Finally I said that I 
felt as if I had seen him before but could not re- 
member where. Young as I was, I wondered then 
if the sensei had felt the same regarding me. So 1 
was disappointed when he made no response. The 
sensei, however, sank into deep thought for a while, 
and answered, “No, I don’t feel I have ever seen 
you before. Are you not mistaken ? __ 

4 

At the end of the month I returned to Tokyo. 
But the sensei left long before. When I parted from 
him, I asked him if I might come to see him some- 
times. The sensei only replied simply, “ Yes, come. 
By this time I felt that I had become intimate with 
him, and I expected a warmer invitation, so this 
unsatisfactory answer slightly wounded my self-con- 
fidence. 

He often disappointed me by assuming this in- 
different attitude. Sometimes he seemed to realize 
it, but at others he was totally unconscious. I ex- 
perienced this little disappointment over and over 
again, but it could never make me want to give him 
up. Instead, whenever I had any doubt about his 


THE SENSEI AND I 


9 


attitude, I was always the more eager to make every 
advance. I felt all the time that if I waited long 
enough and tried hard enough, something I expedted 
would appear to reward me. Though young, I did 
not presume that my youthful enthusiasm could so 
easily work on other human beings. It was beyond 
my power to understand why I entertained such 
feelings for the sensei alone, and it was not until he 
died that all became clear to me. From the beginning 
he never disliked me. His blunt salutations and his 
attitude which often appeared cold were not prompt- 
ed by any desire on his part to discourage my friend- 
ship. The poor sensei warned every one who tried 
to approach him that he was unworthy of friendship, 
and that they had better not approach him. The 
sensei, who did not respond to the warm-hearted 
advances of others, seemed to despise himself before 
he repulsed those who would be his friends. 

Of course when I returned to Tokyo, I had 
every intention of calling on the sensei. I had two 
weeks before school opened, and I thought that I 
should see him during that time. But two or three 
days in the city dimmed the glamour of Kamakura. 
The atmosphere of the great city, together with the 
pull and recall which went with the revival of memo- 
ries, made a strong impression upon my heart. 
Every student I saw in the street filled my mind with 
anticipation of the prospedts of the new term. I 
forgot the sensei for the moment. 

But after a month from the time school opened, 


10 


KOKORO 


I began to relax and the memory of the sensei revived 
in my mind. My walks in the streets lacked their 
former satisfaction, and I looked around my room, 
feeling that something was missing. The sensei’s face 
recurred constantly to my mind, and I wanted to see 
him again. 

The first time that I called at his house, he was 
not at home. The second time, 1 remember, was 
the next Sunday. It was a beautiful day, and the 
sky was so clear that it seemed to penetrate into my 
body. He was out that day too. While we were 
in Kamakura, I heard from the sensei’s own mouth 
that he usually stayed at home, or rather, he did not 
like to go out. Being unable to meet him twice in 
succession, I was reminded of those words of his, 
and felt some disappointment somewhere in my 
heart. So I did not turn away at once, but stood 
looking at the maid’s face, hesitating. The maid, 
recognizing me as the visitor of the previous day, left 
me there and disappeared within the house. Then 
a beautiful lady who seemed to be his wife came out. 
She told me politely that the sensei was accustomed 
to visit a certain grave in Zoshigaya on that day 
every month. She said he had gone out about ten 
minutes before. She expressed deep regret. Then 
I bowed and went out. I walked for about a hun- 
dred yards toward the lively town, then I was seized 
with the impulse to go to Zoshigaya for a walk. 
This inclination was not unmixed with the hope that 
I might meet the sensei. So I turned round at once. 


THE SENSEI AND I II 

5 

I entered the cemetery from the left-hand side 
of the field of young plants in front of it, and pro- 
ceeded along the wide walk bordered with maple- 
trees, when suddenly from the farthest extremity a 
man who looked like the sensei came out of a resting- 
booth. I approached till I could see the rims of his 
spectacles shining in the sun, and all of a sudden 
called to him in a loud voice, “ Sensei I ” He sud- 
denly stopped short, and looked at my face. 

“ Why, why — ? ” Twice the sensei uttered the 
same word, which was repeated in a tone that sound- 
ed strange in the hushed afternoon, till 1 became 
unable to make any reply. 

“ Did you follow me ? Why did you do it ? ” 

The sensei’s attitude was unexpectedly calm; 
his voice was rather melancholy. But in his expres- 
sion there was a kind of cloud which I could not 
make out. 

I told the sensei why I had come. 

“ Did my wife tell you to whose grave I had 
come ? Did she mention the name ? ” 

“ No, of course not.” 

“ O she didn’t ? She ought not to have told 
you anything. Why, this is the first time she ever 
met you, and there w^s no need for her to tell you.” 

The sensei seemed to be satisfied at last. But 
to me his meaning was incomprehensible. 

The sensei and I, trying to get to the street, passed 


12 


KOKORO 


among the graves. Beside the tomb-stones which 
bore the words a certain so-and-so Isabella’s resting- 
place, or the god’s servant Rogin’s long home, a 
stupa stood, on which was written, “ All living things 
possess the quality of Buddha,” and I noticed the 
grave of an ambassador plenipotentiary So-and-so. 
In front of a little tomb-stone on which was engraved 
three Chinese characters, I asked the sensei how it 
should be read. “ Perhaps they mean Andrews,” 
he said, and smiled a bitter smile. 

Unlike me, the sensei did not seem to see humour 
or irony in the way those who had been left behind 
expressed their grief on those stones. At first, with- 
out a word, he listened to my casual remarks, as I 
pointed to a round grave- stone or a long granite 
monument, but at last he said, “ I see that you have 
never given any thought to the meaning of death,” 
and I was silenced. The sensei, too, said nothing 
more. 

On the border of the walk stood a huge gingko- 
tree, so tall that it seemed to be hiding the sky. As 
we stood under this tree, the sensei looked up at the 
high branches and observed, “ It becomes very pretty 
in a few weeks; The leaves turn entirely yellow, 
and the ground hereabout will be covered with the 
golden fallen leaves.” The sensei always walked 
under this tree once a month? 

The man, who was digging the uneven ground 
to make a new resting-place, stopped his work, and 
stood looking at us. We turned to the left and 


THE SENSEI AND I 13 

soon came to the street. 

I, having nothing to do, and nowhere to go, 
walked in the direction that the sensei took. He 
talked less than usual. But I, unaffected by his 
silence, strolled along beside him. 

“ Are you going straight home, sensei ? ” I asked. 
“ Yes, since I have no other place to go.” 

We two, again silent, went down the slope 
southwards. 

“ Is thatyour family plot? ” I began to talk again. 
“ No.” 

“ Whose grave is it that you visit ? — Is it a rela- 
tion of yours ? ” 

“ No.” 

The sensei was again silent. The subject was 
dropped there. Then after we had walked about a 
hundred yards, the sensei suddenly reverted to it. 

“ It is my friend’s grave.” 

“ Do you visit your friend’s grave every month ? ” 
“ Yes.” 

On that day the sensei told me nothing except 

this. 

6 

After that I visited him often. Whenever I 
went, the sensei was at home. The oftener I visited 
him, the more I wanted to see him. 

The sensei’s attitude toward me, however, when 
we became intimate, did not differ much from his 


14 


KOKORO 


manner when we first met. He was always calm, 
sometimes so quiet that I actually felt lonely when 
I was with him. From the first, I was conscious of 
something unapproachable and strange in this man. 
And yet within me was an irresistible desire to be 
near him. Perhaps I was alone in this curious at- 
traction, but the intuition which prompted it could 
be trusted in spite of my youth and inexperience, 
and it was subsequently proved that both the in- 
stinct and attraction had been based on solid ground. 
A man who could love human beings, who could 
not help loving them, yet was unable to receive with 
wide open arms those who wanted to come into his 
heart — this was the sensei. 

He was always calm, and often serene. But 
sometimes a strange cloud passed over his face, 
though it disappeared almost before I perceived it 
like the black shadow of a bird cast upon the window- 
pane. The first time that I noticed that cloud on 
his brow was when I called to him suddenly in the 
Zoshigaya grave-yard. In that strange moment, I 
felt that the pulse which had been pleasant and 
quick died away. But. it was only for a moment. 
My heart recovered its usual elasticity in about five 
minutes, and after that that shadow never affected 
me till one evening at the end of the Indian Summer 
when it again oppressed me. 

As I talked with the sensei, there came to my 
mind the image of the huge gingko-tree to which he 
had specially attracted my attention. Calculating, I 


THE SENSEI AND I 15 

found that the day on which the sensei used to go to 
the grave was the third from that night, the day of the 
week on which I was the least occupied, my lessons 
being finished at noon. So I spoke to the sensei. 

“ Do you think the leaves have fallen from the 
gingko-tree in Zoshigaya yet ? ” 

“ Perhaps it is not entirely bare yet.” 

So saying, the sensei fixed his eyes on my face, 
and kept them there for a while. I added at once. 

“ May I go with you when you visit the grave ? 
I do want to take a walk with you there.” 

“ I go to pay a visit to the grave, never to stroll.” 

“ But if you take the air when you visit the 
grave, it comes to the same thing, doesn’t it ? ” 

The sensei did not reply. Then after a while he 
said, “ I only visit the grave.” He stuck to his point, 
in his mind visiting the grave was different from a 
walk. Whether this was only an excuse for not 
wanting to go with me, I could not guess, but the 
sensei at that moment looked very childish and queer. 
I was inclined to keep to my point. 

“ Then it make's no difference to me if it is not 
a stroll, but please take me with you. I will visit 
the grave.” 

In my mind there was no difference between 
the grave-visiting and the walk. Then the sensei’s 
brow clouded, and in his eyes, a strange light shone. 
It seemed a slight uneasiness, which could not be 
expressed by the words bewilderment, hatred, or 
fear. All of a sudden the strong memory of Zoshi- 


16 


KOKORO 


gaya as I called to the sensei came to me. The two 
impressions were quite the same. “ No,” said the 
sensei, “ I don’t want to go to that grave with any 
one, for a reason that 1 cannot tell. 1 have never 
taken even my wife with me.” 

7 

I wondered. But I never went to see the sensei 
with the idea of probing him, so I left the matter 
alone. This attitude of mine in those days, I think, 
was one of the most precious things in my life. I 
think it was that alone which kept our friendship 
warm. If my friendship for him had been at all 
tinged with curiosity, the string of sympathy which 
bound us would have broken at once and for ever. 
In my youthfulness I was never conscious of my own 
attitude, which was perhaps the reason why it was 
valuable. But what if I had acted in any other way ? 
It makes me shiver only to imagine what might have 
happened. The sensei was always in dread of cold 
eyes intent only upon studying him. 

I formed the habit of calling at his house two 
or three times a month. One day after I had begun 
to call regularly, the sensei asked me suddenly, “ Why 
do you come to see such a man as I ? ” “O I have 
no particular reason. — But am I disturbing you? ” 
“No, I don’t say that,” observed the sensei, and in 
fact I could not find any hint expressed in his manner 
that I was a nuisance. I knew that he did not have 


THE SENSEI AND I 


17 


much company, and that there were only two or 
three among his class-mates living in Tokyo. Once 
in a while I fell in with some students of his own 
province, but none of them seemed as friendly with 
him as I was. 

“ I am such a lonely fellow,” he said, “ that I 
enjoy your company, so I asked you why you come 
to see me so often.” 

“ But why do you ask me such a question ? ” I 
asked again, but the sensei was silent. He only looked 
at my face and asked me how old I was. 

To me this conversation was exceedingly irrele- 
vant, but I left his house without attempting to 
make anything clear. 

Within four days I called on him again. As 
soon as the sensei appeared in the drawing-room, he 
began to laugh, and said, “Here you are again.” 
“ Yes, here I am,” and 1 began to laugh too. 

If anyone else had said that, I should surely have 
been offended. But it was entirely different with the 
sensei. It not only did not offend me, but actually 
pleased me. 

“ I am a lonely fellow,” he repeated those words 
that night. “ I am lonely, but you are a lonely child 
too, I suppose ? As I am old, I can remain quiet, 
though I feel lonely, but you cannot, your youth 
prevents it. You want to be doing and to advance 
as much as you can. Don’t you? You want to 
come upon something as you advance.” 

“ I am not lonely at all,” I interrupted, but he 


18 


KOKORO 


did not seem to hear. 

“It is in our youth that our sense of loneliness 
is most keen. If not, why do you come to see me ? ” 
Once more he repeated his words of the time before. 
“ You are lonely somewhere in your heart even when 
you are with me. Because I have not power enough 
to pluck out your loneliness from you. You will be 
forced to stretch your hands in another direction. 
You will not think of coming to see me then,” he 
added, and laughed a lonely laugh. 

8 

Fortunately the sensei’s prophecy was not realiz- 
ed. Inexperienced as I was, I could not understand 
even the obvious meaning of this prophecy. I con- 
tinued to go to see him, and finally I was sometimes 
invited to take supper with him, which gave me 
more opportunities of conversing with his wife. 

As a normal human being, I was not indifferent 
to women. But I had had no friends among them, 
my youth and circumstances had not encouraged 
intimacy with women. Perhaps it may have been 
for this reason that I was often attracted by strangers 
I passed on the street. The sensei’s wife, when I 
first saw her at the entrance of his house, impressed 
me as beautiful. And this impression was strength- 
ened by subsequent meetings. But up to this time 
her personality had made little impression upon me. 
This was undoubtedly due to her having no oppor- 


THE SENSEI AND I 


19 

tunity of showing her peculiar gifts, rather than to 
her not possessing them. But I always regarded her 
as something belonging to the sensei, as it were, a 
part of him. She, on her part, looked upon me 
kindly because I happened to be the student who 
often came to see her husband. So I remember 
nothing about her during those early days of our 
acquaintance except her beauty. 

Once I was given sake 1 at his house, waited upon 
by his wife. The sensei seemed to be gayer than 
usual. He offered his wife the cup which he had 
just drained, saying, “ Do take a cup or two, dear.” 
She was about to decline, but took the cup reluc- 
tantly. Drawing her well-shaped eye-brows together, 
she held to her lips the cup which I had half filled 
with sake. Then they began to talk. 

“ How unusual ! You hardly ever ask me to 
take sake, do you Z ” 

“ Because I know you don’t like it. But it is 
good for you sometimes. It cheers you up.” 

“ Incleed, it doesn’t. On the contrary, it makes 
me most uncomfortable. But you always look happy 
when you take a little.” 

“Sometimes I feel extremely gay. But not 
always.” 

“ How do you feel to-night Z ” 

“ This is one of the gay nights.” 

“ Suppose you try it every night just a little Z ” 


1 A kind of wine made from rice* 


20 KOKORO 

“ No, thank you.” 

“ But you had better. It cheers us both up, 

and I like to see you happy.” ^ 

The sensei and his wife lived alone with their 
fnaid. And whenever 1 called, the house was very 
quiet. I never remember hearing a spontaneous, 
joyous laugh. Sometimes I felt that the sensei and 
I were the only human beings in that silent house. 

“ It might have been better if we had had chil- 
dren,” she observed once, turning toward me. “ Yes, 
I suppose so,” I replied. But I felt no particular 
sympathy. Not yet having had a wife or children, 
I regarded the latter only as a nuisance. 

“ Shall 1 find one to adopt for you ?” the sensei 

said. 

“ An adopted child ! That’s different, I am afraid. 
Dou’t you think so ? ” She looked at me, as if 
wishing me to confirm her opinion. 

“ But we can never have children of our own, 
no, never,” he said. 

His wife was silent. But I asked him to explain 
what he meant. 

“ It’s our nemesis,” he said, laughing aloud. 

9 

As far as I had ever been able to know, the 
sensei and his wife were a happy couple. But as I 
had never lived with them as a member of their 
family, I could not know the intimacies of their 


21 


the sensei AND I 

married life, but when he was talking with me in 
his drawing-room, he often called his wife instead 
of the maid when he wanted something, turning back 
towards the sliding-door, and calling her name, 

“ Shizu,” in a tone which always sounded tende. 
Besides the manner of his wife’s answer to his caU 
was extremely gentle. When I was invited to dinner, 
and his wife sat at the table, the harmony of this 
couple seemed to manifest itself more clearly than 

eVef The sensei often took his wife to concerts and 
theatres and I remember their taking short trips 

together on several occasions. I still ^* e 
postcard which he sent to me from Hakone. When 
he went to Nikko, 1 got a letter from him which 
contained a maple leaf. 

This in brief is the account of the relation be- 
tween the sensei and his wife as I saw it in those days. 
There was, however, only one exception. One day 
when I was just about to announce myself at 
entrance as usual, I heard someone talking m the 
direction of the drawing-room. Listening closely, 
I found that the tone was not ordinary, but sug- 
gested a quarrel. As the drawing-room in hishouse 
was next to the entrance-hall, my ears could catch 
the voices clearly enough to detect th^ha^nes^ 
though I stood outside of the entrance-door. 1 k 
one of them was the sensei’s, which now and the 
grew louder than usual. I was not so sure about 
the other voice, because of its low tone, but sup- 


12 


KOKORO 

posed it was his wife’s, and it seemed to be sobbing. 

1 did not know what to do for a moment, but making 
up my mind, returned to my lodgings at once. 

A strangely 'uneasy mood attacked me, and 
could not take in what I was reading. In about an 
hour the sensei appeared under my window and called 
my name. In surprise, 1 opened the window. Let 
us stroll about a little,’’ he said. I took out my 
watch which I had bound to my obi when I went 

to his house, and looked at it. It was past eight. 1 

still wore my hakama* so 1 went out at once. 

That night I drank beer with the sensei. He 
was not able to drink much, and when he did not 
cheer up with the quantity that he usually took, he 
would never venture to take more and risk becoming 

tipsy. ... 

“It is of no use to-night,” he said, smiling 

bitterly* - , 

“ Ah, doesn’t it make you happy ? 1 asked, 

quite sorry for him* 

While I sat with him, the happenings of an 
hour before never left my mind. It tortured me 
like a fish-bone stuck in my throat. In one minute 
I almost , determined to confess all, but the next 
minute I decided not to, and I was strangely rest- 
less, till the sensei perceived it, and he began. 

“You are not yourself to-night, and to tell you 


1 A kind of sash, 

* A kind of kilt worn by student#. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


23 


the truth, I am not either. Have you noticed any- 
thing ? ” 

I could not answer. 

“ In fadt, I quarrelled with my wife a little while 
ago, which has excited my foolish nerves,” he 
advanced. 

“ Why . . . ? ” I could not repeat the word 
quarrel. 

“ Because she misunderstands me. Even though 
I explain to her repeatedly, she can never understand. 
So I lost my temper.” 

“ How does she misunderstand you ? ” I asked. 
But he did not attempt to answer me, and went on. 

“ If 1 were the kind of man that she thinks me, 
I should never suffer like this.” 

Again, it was impossible for me to imagine how 
much he was suffering. 

10 

Neither he nor I uttered a word for about seven 
hundred yards, as we walked along towards home. 
But after that long silence, the sensei suddenly ob- 
served, “I was wrong. I was angry when I left home. 
She must be worried. Women’s lot, I think, is 
harder than men’s. And my wife has no one to 
rely on, except me, no one at all.” 

He paused, and was silent for a while. But he 
did not seem to wait for my answer, and went on. 
“ It hardly seems right for me to speak like this. It 


24 


KOKORO 


might give you the impression that I am sttong- 
minded. How do I appear to you ? Am I strong 
or weak ? ” 

“ O about midway between the two, I should 
think,” I answered. This answer appeared to have 
been a little unexpected. He closed up again, and 
walked along without a word. 

My lodging lay on the way to his home. How- 
ever, when we reached the nearest point to my lodg- 
ing, I felt I could not leave him there, and asked him 
if I might accompany him home. But he stopped 
me, waving his hand. 

“ It’s too late. Go back to your room as soon 
as you can. I, too, must hurry, my wife is waiting.” 

“ My wife is waiting ” strangely warmed my 
heart, and because of that I soon fell asleep, reas- 
sured, and I remembered it for a long time. It 
clearly showed me that the breach between the sen- 
sei and his wife was not a serious one. And my 
subsequent visit to his home almost convinced me 
that on the whole these misunderstandings were not 
frequent. In fadt, he once said, “I have known 
only one woman in my life. No woman except my 
wife has ever appealed to me. As for my wife, she 
too regards me as the only man in all the world. 
So we ought to be the happiest couple on earth.” 

I have forgotten upon what occasion he made 
this observation, so I cannot explain why he made 
such a confession to me. But I can recall even now 
how sincere his manner was and how melancholy 


THE SENSEI AND I 


25 


was his tone. But the last words “ We ought to be 
the happiest couple on earth ” sounded strange to 
me. Why did he not say “ We are the happiest 
couple ” ? . Why did he substitute “ We ought to 
be ” ? That was what puzzled me. Besides, he laid 
especial stress on those last words. Was he really 
happy ? Or did he feel that he ought to be happier 
than he really was? The question troubled me. 
But it was not my nature to entertain doubts for a 
very long time, and this one soon disappeared. 

Not long after this, I happened to call at his 
house when he was out and had a talk with his wife. 
The sensei had gone out to Shinbashi to see a friend 
off who was going abroad by the steamer which was 
to leave Yokohama that day. In those days people 
who were to take the ship left Shinbashi at 8.30 in 
the morning. I wanted the sensei’s opinion on a 
certain book, and called at his house at nine, as he 
had arranged for me. But he had suddenly been 
obliged to go to Shinbashi out of courtesy to his 
friend who had taken the trouble to come to say 
good-bye on the day before. He had left word for 
me to wait. So I had a talk with his wife while I 
waited in his drawing-room. 

11 

I was already a university student, and I felt 
myself grown up since my first visit to the sensei. 
I had also come to know the sensei’s wife rather 


26 


KOKORO 


well, so I felt no awkwardness or restraint when I 
talked with her. At first we spoke of many things 
which I have forgotten. Only one portion of our 
conversation stands out clearly in my mind. But 
before we come to that, I must say a word in pre- 
paration. 

The sensei was a graduate of the Imperial Uni- 
versity, which fadt I had known from the beginning. 
But it was not until a few weeks after I returned 
from Kamakura that I found out that he had no 
fixed profession. I wondered at the time how he 
had managed to live without anything to do. 

His name and existence were almost unknown 
in the world. I, who had come into close contact 
with him, seemed to be the only one who had either 
knowledge of or respect for his learning or his ideas. 
I often expressed my regret on this subjedt to the 
sensei. But he, on his part, never took what I said 
seriously, and only said, “ If a man like me goes into 
the world and speaks out his opinions, it is un- 
pardonable.” 

To me that answer was too modest, until I real- 
ized that it showed his cold critical attitude toward 
the world. As a matter of fadt, the sensei sometimes 
attacked those among his class-mates who had be- 
come famous with merciless severity. I frankly 
mentioned to him this contradiction in his conduct, 
for I was really sorry for the world which was so 
indifferent to his gifts. The sensei observed then 
in a low tone, “ It can’t be helped, as I am a man 


THE SENSEI AND I 


17 


deprived of the power to adt upon the world.” In 
his face a deep and serious expression appeared. 
Whether it showed disappointment, or regret, or 
sadness, I did not know, but it was so strong and 
impressive that I could not utter a word. 

As I talked with his wife, the subjedt of our 
conversation shifted from the sensei to this problem, 
and settled there. 

“ Why does the sensei never work in the world, 
only studying and thinking at home like that ? ” 

“ He is hopeless, he doesn’t like that sort of 
thing.” 

“ Is it because he has come to believe that it is 
foolish to seek for outward success in life ? ” 

“ Has come to believe — as I am a woman, I am 
afraid I cannot understand rightly, but I think that 
is not the reason. He wants to do something after 
all, doesn’t he? But he cannot, which really is 
tragic.” 

“ But he is perfectly well, isn’t he ? ” 

“ Yes, of course. He has nothing wrong with 
him at all.” 

“ Then why can’t he take any adtive part in the 
world ? ” 

“ I don’t know. If I could understand that, I 
should never worry like this. But since I cannot 
understand what he is thinking, I am anxious about 
him all the time.” 

There was deep sympathy in her tone. But the 
smile did not disappear from her lips. As far as 


28 KOKORO 

looks went, 1 was graver than she. Looking rather 
grim, I remained silent. Then as if remembering 
something, she suddenly began. 

“When he was young, he was not like this. 
He was quite different. But he has changed entirely.” 

“ When do you mean ? ” 

“ In his student days.” 

“ Did you know him when he was a student ? ” 

And suddenly she blushed. 

12 

I heard from both the sensei and his wife that 
she was a native of Tokyo. I had heard her say in 
a joking manner that to speak exadtly she was half 
Edokko. 1 For her father had come from Tottori, as 
I remember, while her mother was born in Ichigaya 
when Tokyo was still called Edo. But the sensei’s 
home was Niigata, a province far away from either 
Tottori or Tokyo. So if his wife had known him 
as a student, apparently it was not because they had 
come from the same native place. His wife, blush- 
ing, however, seemed to be unwilling to speak fur- 
ther, so 1 did not pursue the subject. 

From the time I learned to know him until his 
death, I was deeply acquainted with his thoughts 
and feelings as I talked with him about many things, 
but I never heard him speak about his courtship and 


1 A native of Tokyo. 


THE SENSEI AND I 29 

his marriage. Sometimes I believed that he was 
right, feeling that his discretion and modesty pre* 
vented him at his age from touching upon anything 
so intimate to a young student. Sometimes I resent- 
ed his reserve, considering that as he and his wife 
had been brought up in the conventionality of the 
older generation, they had not courage enough to 
talk quite frankly about such a subjedt as this. In 
both cases, however, no fadts were given to me, and 
I formed these considerations on the supposed ex- 
istence of a flowery romance which had led to their 
marriage. 

This assumption of mine was not wrong. But 
I could only imagine one side of his love. The sen- 
sei’s marriage contained a dreadful tragedy as well as 
a beautiful romance. How fatal that tragedy had 
been to the sensei was not known to his wife. She 
is still ignorant of the fadt. The sensei died without 
telling her. He destroyed his own life before he 
destroyed his wife’s happiness. 

I am not now going to tell about this tragedy. 
About the love which seemed to be born to cause 
this tragedy between these two people, neither the 
sensei nor his wife told me anything at all, the latter 
from modesty, and the former, from a deeper cause. 

There is, however, only one other thing remain- 
ing in my memory. Once in spring-time I went with 
him to Ueno, and saw a charming couple walking 
close together under the cherry-blossoms. They 
were rather conspicuous in the gay and crowded 


30 


KOKORQ 


place, and people were looking at them with more 
interest than at the cherry-blossoms. 

“ They seem to be a newly married couple,” 
the sensei observed. 

“ Very engrossed with each other, aren’t they ? ” 
I replied. 

The sensei did not even laugh bitterly. He only 
changed his position so as to lose sight of the couple, 
and said. 

“ Have you ever been in love ? ” 

“ No,” I replied. 

“Don’t you want to fall in love with some- 
body ? ” 

I was silent. 

“ You don’t deny that you want to, do you ? ” 

“No.” 

“ You spoke unsympathetically of that man and 
woman, didn’t you ? In those words of yours is 
mingled the voice of your unhappiness at not ex- 
periencing love when you are seeking for it. Don’t 
you think so ? ” 

“ Did it sound like that ? ” 

“Yes. One who is satisfied with his happy 
love always speaks in a warmer voice. But — but, 
mind you, love is a sin. Do you know that 1 ” 

I was frightened all of a sudden, and could not 
reply. 

13 

We were jostled by the crowd, who all looked 


THE SENSEI AND I 


31 


happy. So I had no time to talk until we came out 
into a wood where there was not a human being to 
be seen, and not even a cherry-blossom. 

“ Do you mean that love is a sin ? ” I asked 
him at once. 

“ Yes, of course it is.” The sensei answered, in 
a tone as strong and impressive as before. 

“ Why ? ” 

“ You will understand before long. Indeed, you 
should have understood already. Your heart has 
been agitated with love for a long time. Has it not ? ” 

I straightway began to examine my heart, but 
it was disappointingly empty, and presented nothing 
of interest to me. 

“ Indeed there is nothing like that in my heart, 
and I believe I am not concealing anything from 
you.” 

“ You are wandering about now in search of 
someone to love. And you cannot help moving 
forward in the hope of reaching the tranquillity of 
the discovery.” 

“ Indeed at the moment I don’t seem to be at 

all.” 

“ It was because of this longing that you came 
to me, wasn’t it ? ” 

“ Perhaps so. But that is different from love, 
isn’t it?” 

“ It is one step toward love. You came to me 
first as a kind of preparation for the embrace of a 
woman.” 


32 


KOKORO 


“ They seem entirely different to me.” 

“ No, they are the same thing. You are trying 
to be satisfied with me, but I, a man, can never 
satisfy you. What is more, because of certain con* 
ditions, I haven’t even been able to make you happy* 
Indeed I am sorry for you. But it cannot be helped 
if you give me up and move forward in another 
direction. I am rather hoping that you will. But — ” 

A strange sadness oppressed me, and I said. 

“ Oh, well, if you believe that I am going to 
give you up — But indeed I am not going to give 
you up. Such a thought has never occurred to me.” 

The sensei did not seem to hear me. 

“ But you must take care, because it is a sin to 
love. While you are with me, however, there is no 
danger, though I cannot satisfy you. — Tell me, do 
you know how a man feels when he is bound by 
long black hair ? ” 

Yes, I knew it in imagination, but not in reality. 
Anyway the word sin that he had used was so vague 
that I could not understand what it meant. Besides 
I felt slightly uncomfortable. 

“ Sensei, please explain more clearly what you 
mean by the word sin. But if you don’t want to, 
let us not say any more about it, until the time 
comes when I can understand it better.” 

“ I was wrong. I thought I was revealing a 
truth to you. But in fact I was only irritating you. 
Yes, I am to blame.” 

The sensei and I walked slowly along from the 


THE SENSEI AND I 


33 


back of the Imperial Museum toward Uguisudani. 
The bamboo clumps covering a part of the garden 
could be seen through the hedge, looking solitary 
and mysterious. 

“ Do you know the reason why I visit my 
friend’s grave in Zoshigaya every month ? ” he asked, 
quite suddenly. He knew very well that I did not. 
I was silent for a while. Then as if he had realized 
the fadt for the first time, he said. 

“O 1 was wrong again. I was so sorry that I 
annoyed you, that I wanted to explain. But it has 
only irritated you again. That cannot be helped. 
Let us not talk any more about it. At any rate, 
don’t forget that love is a sin, and at the same time, 
it is sacred.” 

I was more and more puzzled. But he did not 
mention love any more. 

14 

Being young, I was apt to let myself be absorbed 
in my feeling towards the sensei. At least it so ap- 
peared to him. Talking with him was more pro- 
fitable to me than listening to the school lectures. He 
seemed to have had a deeper experience in life than 
the professors. In a word, the solitary sensei, who 
talked little, seemed to me a greater person than those 
renowned men who taught me from the platform. 

“Don’t become too much excited,” the sensei 

said. 


34 


KOKORO 


“ OI am not excited, and I can trust my judge- 
ment.” I replied, with assurance. But he did not 
trust my self-confidence. 

“ You are in a fever of excitement now. But 
when that is past, everything will be dull and mono- 
tonous. I feel conscience-stricken to be so loved 
by you. But when I imagine the change which must 
take place in you in the time to come, 1 feel even 
more uneasy.” 

“Do you regard me as so shallow a person ? 
Don’t you trust me any more than that ? ” 

“ I am sorry for you.” 

“ Is it true that you cannot trust me, and per- 
haps hesitate to say so ? ” 

The sensei, in slight annoyance, turned toward 
the garden. The camellias, with their heavy strong 
red, had been in bloom when I was there before, 
but they were all gone now. The sensei had a habit 
of looking at them while he was talking in the draw- 
ing-room. 

“I distrust all human beings, not especially 
you.” 

As he spoke, a voice which seemed to be a gold- 
fish vendor’s was heard from across the hedge. But 
there was no other sound. The lane which was 
about seven hundred yards from the street was 
quieter than might have been expected. The house 
was hushed as usual. I knew that my words could 
be plainly heard by his wife, sitting in the next room, 
busy with needle-work or some other feminine task. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


35 


I forgot this for the moment when I asked ; “ Don’t 
you trust even your wife ? ” 

An expression of slight uneasiness appeared in 
his face, and he avoided a direct answer. 

“ I don’t trust myself even. In other words, 
as I myself am unable to rely upon myself, it has 
become impossible for me to trust others. The only 
thing that such a man can do, is to curse himself.” 

“If you think like that, how can anyone be 
sure of himself? ” 

“ O I don’t just think in this way. I have adted 
like this. Then I was astonished, and was terribly 
afraid.” 

I wanted to continue. But just then we heard 
his wife calling him twice behind the sliding-doors. 
When the sensei answered her second call, she ex- 
cused herself and asked him to come to the next 
room. I could not guess what had made her want 
to speak to him, and he came back so soon that I 
had no time to think it out. 

“ At any rate, you must not put too much trust 
in me. For the time will come when you will repent 
it, then you will take most cruel revenge upon the 
one who betrayed you.” 

“ What do you mean ? ” 

“ The realization you have once knelt before 
the objedt of your adoration makes you want to put 
your feet on the head of that man, when the feeling 
of veneration has disappeared. I hope to divert your 
admiration now, so that you will never feel that way 


36 


KOKORO 


toward me in future. It is better to endure a little 
loneliness now than to have to suffer more terrible 
solitude in the future. We, born in this modern 
age filled with a sense of freedom, independence, 
and self-assurance, have to endure a certain amount 
of loneliness as our sacrifice to the age.” 

I could not answer one who showed such re- 
markable resolution. 

15 

After that, I always felt disturbed whenever I 
looked at his wife. Did the sensei always adopt this 
attitude in his treatment of his wife ? If so, was 
she happy ? I had so little opportunity to see her, 
and when I did, which was rarely alone, her manner 
was so normal, that I could not judge by her manner 
whether she was satisfied or not. 

I had another doubt besides this. Where had 
this attitude toward human beings come from? 
Was it a natural outcome of his self-examination or 
observation of the modern age with critical eyes ? 
He was a speculative kind of person, who liked to 
sit and think. Could anyone ever with a mind, as 
alert as his determine upon such an attitude by sit- 
ting at home and judging the world ? I could not 
think so. The sensei seemed to have arrived at his 
realization as the result of adrual experience. It did 
not resemble the shell of a building now cold after 
a raging fire. The sensei, as he appeared to me, was 


THE SENSEI AND I 


37 


without doubt a thinker. His conclusions were not 
based upon merely objective observations, but seem- 
ed to have sprung from powerful events, in which 
he himself had taken a terrible part, at which time 
his blood had boiled and his pulse had jumped. 

There was no need for me to try to imagine 
this, for the sensei himself had confessed it to me. 
Only his confession was like a crest of the cloud, 
which covered my head with something dreadful 
and far-reaching. Yet I could not understand why 
it was dreadful. The confession was vague, but it 
had apparently shaken my nerves. 

I seemed to find some soul- stirring love affair 
at the base of the sensei’s philosophy of life. (This 
love affair was of course the one of which his wife 
had been the heroine.) When I remembered that 
he had once said that love was a sin, I felt this had 
been more or less the key-note of his trouble. But 
the sensei acknowledged that he was still in love with 
his wife. It was impossible to think that such a 
pessimistic view had sprung up from their love. 
“ The recollection that you have knelt before the 
object of your adoration makes you wish to put your 
feet on the same one’s head.” These words of the 
sensei might apply to others, but not to this couple. 

The unknown grave in Zoshigaya — this, too, 
came into my mind sometimes. I knew that it was 
the grave of a man who had been closely connected 
with him. I, who was approaching the sensei’s life, 
but could not come near it, rsceiyed the grave into 




38 


KOKORO 


my thoughts as a part of the life in the sensei’s mind. 
The grave to me, however, was quite a dead one. To 
me it was not the key that was to open the door of 
life between us. On the contrary, it seemed rather to 
be a monster which stood between us and prevented, 
the unrestrained intercourse of our friendship. 

While I was puzzled by these doubts, I had an- 
other chance to talk with his wife alone. It was 
late autumn, and in these chilly days, no one could 
be indifferent to the atmosphere of bustle which 
attended the shortening day. At this time, a thief 
had stolen articles on three successive days in the 
sensei’s neighbourhood. It had happened in the 
early hours of the evening. The thief always took 
something, though the article stolen had little value. 
The sensei’s wife was a little disturbed. One evening 
the sensei was obliged to make one of a party at a 
restaurant, to entertain a doctor from his native 
place who had come up to Tokyo from the provincial 
hospital where he was working. Because of the 
thief, he asked me if I would come and take care of 
his house while he was out, and I gladly accepted. 

16 

It was when the city-lights were about to be 
lighted that I reached his house, but the punctual 
sensei had already gone. His wife led me into his 
study, explaining that he had just left, fearing to be 
late. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


39 


Beside a desk and a chair, several rows of leather 
bound volumes were shining in the eledtric light 
through the glass of his book-cases. She asked me 
to sit in front of the brazier, told me to enjoy my- 
self reading, then she went out. I could not help 
feeling like a guest waiting for the host to come 
back, and was not very comfortable. I remained in 
a formal attitude, smoking, and could hear the sen- 
sei’s wife talking to the maid in the sitting-room. 
The study was situated just round the corner from 
the sitting-room. So the room was quieter than 
the drawing-room. When she finished talking, the 
house was very quiet. As if waiting for a thief, I sat 
still, on guard. 

About half an hour later, she appeared in the 
study again. “Why,” she said, looking in, half 
surprised at me sitting formally like a guest. It seem- 
ed to appear ridiculous to her. “ You must be un- 
comfortable, sitting like that.” 

“ No, not at all.” 

“ But you certainly must be tired.” 

“ O no, I am not, as I have my mind concen- 
trated on the thief.” 

With a cup of Indian tea in her hand, she stood 
there, laughing. 

“ But since this room is in one corner, it hardly 
seems the right place to watch for the thief, do you 
think so ? ” I observed. 

“ That is true, please come to the centre, if you 
don’t mind. I thought you might be bored, so I 


40 


KOKORO 


brought you some tea, but if you don’t mind, you 
can have it in the other room.” 

I followed her to the sitting-room, where an 
iron tea-kettle was singing pleasantly on a beautifully 
polished oblong brazier. I had tea and cakes there. 
She did not drink tea, as she was afraid it would 
rob her of sound sleep. 

“ Does he often go out like this ? ” 

“ No, very seldom. Indeed he is growing more 
reludtant to meet people.” 

As she said this, there was no sign of anxiety 
in her manner, so I became bold. 

“ Then are you the only exception ? ” 

“ No, I am included.” 

“ No, you are wrong,” I interrupted, “ you said 
that well knowing that it is not true, didn’t you ? ” 



“Why?” 

“ Because I am convinced that from the moment 
he fell in love with you he began to hate the world.” 

“ You are a scholar, so you are skilled in pure 
arguments. But by the same reasoning, can we say 
that he began to hate me when he started to dislike 
the world ? ” 

“ Yes, we may say that too, but I am right in 
this case.” 

“O 1 don’t care much for discussion. Men 
like it though, and seem to be perfectly happy when 
they are arguing about something. I wonder why 
they don’t get tired offering and taking quite empty 
cups.” 





THE SENSEI AND I 41 

Her words were rather vehement. But their 
tone was by no means strong. She was not modern 
enough to find a sort of pride and satisfaction in 
making others acknowledge the superiority of her 
mind. She seemed to live by her heart, which was 
deeper than her mind. 

17 

I had something more to say to her. But I was 
afraid that she would think me given to vain argu- 
ment, and was silent, looking into my empty cup. 
Then as if wishing to make me comfortable, she 
offered me another cup of tea, which I accepted at 
once. 

“ One, or two ? ” She asked, picking up the 
cube-sugar with a curious looking instrument, and 
looking at my face. She was not trying to fascinate 
me, but she was brimming with charm, as if trying 
to atone for her strong words a few minutes before. 

But I drank the tea without speaking, and was 
still silent even after I finished it. 

“ How quiet you are ! ” She observed. 

“Because I am afraid you will accuse me of 
being argumentative.” I replied. 

“ O but I shan’t.” 

That breaking the ice, we began again. We 
talked about the sensei who was interesting to both 
of us. 

“ May I go on from where we left off just now ? 


42 


KOKORO 


You may think what I say only an empty argument, 
but indeed I am serious.” 

“ Then do go on.” 

“If you should disappear suddenly, could he 
ever manage to live on as before ? ” 

“ O how can I tell ? You will have to ask him. 
Why should you ask me such a thing ? ” 

“ I am in earnest. So you must not evade my 
question. Please answer me honestly without hesi- 
tation.” 

“ I am trying to. But honestly I don’t know.” 
“ Then how much do you love Sensei ? I asked 
you this, because you, and not he, can answer.” 

“ But do you think it is necessary that I should 
answer such a question ? ” 

“ Why, because the answer is too obvious ? ” 

“ Well, yes.” 

“ Can you imagine what would become of him 
if he should lose such a faithful companion as you ? 
He seems to have lost interest in everything in the 
world. What would he do, if he lost you ? Speak- 
ing only from your point of view, do you think he 
would be happy, or unhappy ? ” 

“ It is plain to me, though perhaps he would 
not agree with me. Without me, he would only be 
miserable. He might not be able to live. It may 
sound conceited, but I believe that 1 am making him 
as happy as he can be in this world, and that no 
other woman, no matter what her virtues might be, 
could take my place. Reassured by this, I can keep 


THE SENSEI AND I 


43 


my peace of mind.” 

“ I think that faith must be a great comfort to 
him, don’t you think so ? ” 

“ Ah, that is another question.” 

“Then do you continue to believe that he 
doesn’t like you ? ” 

“ O no, I don’t think he hates me. There is 
no reason why he should. But he began to hate 
the world, no, not the world, but humanity, only 
recently. So as one of those human beings, I have 
no right to claim his love, have I ? ” 

I understood at last what she meant when she 
said that he hated her. 

18 

I admired her understanding. Her manner 
which was far from that of an old-fashioned Japa- 
nese woman attracted me, though she scarcely used 
the so-called modern words which had come into 
fashion in those days. 

I was a careless youth, who had no experience 
of deep friendship with women. As a man, I always 
dreamed of women as the objedts of my longing, 
purely from instindt. But it was like the feeling 
which takes possession of us when we look upon 
the lovely clouds of spring, a mere indefinite longing. 
So in the presence of a real woman, my feelings 
often underwent a violent change ; instead of being 
attracted by the woman in front of me, I felt strangely 


44 


KOKORO 


repelled. But my feeling was quite different while 
I was talking with this lady. I almost lost conscious- 
ness of the so-called inequality of the thought of 
men and women. I forgot that she was a woman. 
I looked upon her only as a faithful critic who had 
profound sympathy for the sensei . 

“When I asked you why he did not take a 
more active part in the world, you said that he was 
not like that when he was young, didn’t you 1 ” 

“ Yes, I did. He was entirely different.” 

“ What was he like 1 ” 

“ A man thoroughly reliable, as you and I wish 
him to be.” 

“ Why was if that he changed suddenly 1 ” 

“ It wasn’t suddenly, but very gradually.” 

“ You have been with him all that time, haven’t 
you ? ” 

“ Of course I have, as I am his wife.” 

“ Then 1 suppose you ought to know why he 
has changed.” 

“ That is what troubles me most. It is dreadful 
to hear you say this, but to save my life, I cannot 
think of any reason for the change in him. You 
cannot imagine how many times I have begged him 
to confess everything.” 

“ And what is his answer 1 ” 

“ He says that he has nothing to confess, and 
there is nothing for me to worry about. He never 
takes me seriously, but only says that his nature has 
changed like this.” 


THE SENSEI ANp I 45 

I was silent. She, too, stopped talking. No 
sound was heard from the maid in the servant’s 
room, and the thought of the thief had disappeared 
entirely from my mind. 

“You don’t think I am responsible for this 
change in him ? ” she said suddenly. 

“ O no,” I replied. 

“ O please don’t hesitate to speak the truth. 
I would rather be torn to pieces than be held re- 
sponsible for this thing.” Again she observed. “ I 
have always meant to do the best I can for him, 1 
am sure you know that.” 

“ And Sensei knows that, I assure you. It’s all 
right, please be comforted and don’t worry.” 

She levelled the ashes in the brazier, and poured 
water into the iron kettle, which stopped singing at 
once. 

“ Sometimes when I can no longer endure the 
strain, I beg him to tell me what is wrong with me 
and help me to correct it. Then he always says 
that I have nothing to correct, assuring me that it is 
he who is at fault. And I become sadder and sadder 
until I weep with the desire to know my fault.” 

There were tears in her eyes. 

19 

Up to this time, I had regarded her as a woman 
of understanding. But as we talked, her manner 
had become gradually different. Instead of appeal- 


46 


KOKORO 


ing to my mind, she began to impress my heart. 
There was no difficulty in their married life, or rather 
there should have been none, yet there was some- 
thing wrong. But when she tried to look for it, 
there was nothing to put her hand on. This was 
the root of her trouble. 

She affirmed that because of his pessimistic at- 
titude towards the world, he had come to dislike 
her. But this reasoning did not satisfy her. On 
the contrary, her mind dwelt on the idea that his 
hatred for the world had sprung from his dislike of 
her. But try as she might, she failed to find proof 
for this. The sensei’s attitude was always that of a 
good husband, kind and considerate at all times. 
His wife, who had tried to bury the doubt which 
lay like a lump on her heart in the affectionate in- 
timacies of everyday life, disclosed it to me that night. 

“ Tell me,” she said, “ which is responsible for 
the change in him, I, or your so-called philosophy 
of life ? O please be frank, I entreat you.” 

It was far from me to conceal anything from 
her. How could any answer that I could give satisfy 
her when I knew nothing whatsoever of the ma tter ? 
And I believed there was something which was be- 
yond my knowledge. So all I could say was, “I 
don’t know.” 

As soon as I answered, her face changed and 
showed the miserable expression of one who could 
not get what she wanted. And I added at once. 

“ But I swear that Sensei never dislikes you. I 


THE SENSEI AND I 


47 


am only repeating what I have heard from Sensei 
himself. And he is not a liar, is he ? ” 

She was silent. Then after a while she said. 

“ To tell the truth, there is something.” 

“ Is it about the cause of his change ? ” 

“Yes. If it is the cause, I at least shall be 
relieved of responsibility.” 

“What is it?” 

She looked at her hands on her lap, hesitating. 
“ Will you judge it for me, if I tell you ? ” 

“ I will do the best I can.” 

“ But I don’t tell you all. He will not permit 
it. So I shall tell you as far as I can.” 

Excited and tense, I swallowed hard. 

“ While he was yet a university student, he had 
a very intimate friend, who died just a few weeks 
before their graduation, quite suddenly.” 

She added in a very low tone, as if whispering, 
“ In fa<±, he committed suicide.” Her tone was so 
strange that I could not resist asking, “ Why ? ” 

“ That is all I can say. But it has been since 
that that Sensei has become like this little by little. 
I don’t know why he died. Probably Sensei doesn’t 
either. At any rate, it is not hard for me to con- 
clude that he has changed since then.” 

“ Is the grave in Zoshigaya that friend’s ? ” 

“ That I am not allowed to tell you. But can 
the death of one’s best friend be the sole cause of 
such a change? I am so anxious to know, and I 
want to hear your opinion.” 


48 


KOKORO 


My judgement was against it on the whole. 

20 

I tried to comfort her as far as the facts that I 
knew allowed me. She, too, seemed to want me to 
console her as much as possible. So we continued 
our talk about the sensei. But I was entirely in igno- 
rance of the- root of all the trouble. And her un- 
easiness, too, came from a doubt which was indeed 
like a thin drifting cloud. Even she herself did not 
know much about the true state of things. Besides 
she could not tell all she knew. So I, the comforter, 
and she, the comforted, were perhaps both being 
tossed on the waves of uncertainty. And thus float- 
ing in doubt, she never relinquished her effort to 
reach out her hand and clutch at my dubious 
judgement. 

As soon as the sensei’s footseps were heard in 
front of the house at about ten o’clock, she, as if 
forgetting everything we had been talking about, 
stood up, quite regardless of me who sat before her, 
and greeted him just as he opened the entrance-door. 
I, left alone, followed her. The maid did not appear, 
she must have been dozing in her room. 

The sensei was in rather a good temper. But 
his wife was even more high-spirited. I, who could 
not forget the glittering drops in her beautiful eyes 
and the contraction of her black eyebrows a few 
minutes before, watched the change in her face care- 


THE SENSEI AND 1 


4 $ 


fully as something remarkable. If it had not been 
a pretence — I could not believe it possible — her con- 
fession might be regarded as a woman’s caprice 
especially intended to play on my feelings. But it 
never occurred to me to watch her so critically. I 
was rather relieved that she became cheerful all at 
once. And I concluded that there was no serious 
cause for anxiety about them. 

The sensei asked me, laughing, “ Thank you very 
much. Has a thief come ? ” and added, “ Aren’t 
you disappointed not to find him ? ” 

When 1 took my leave, she said that she was 
very sorry, which sounded like a joke, meaning that 
she felt sorry because the thief had not come when 
I was waiting for him, rather than because I had 
wasted the evening on such a useless quest. So 
saying, she wrapped up the cakes which I had left, 
and handed them to me. I put the package in my 
sleeve, and hurried on my way through the chilly 
lonely lanes to the lively town. 

I have taken the account of that night out of 
my memory and recorded its details because we can- 
not do without them. But to tell the truth, 1 did 
not regard the conversation of that evening very 
seriously when I walked from the sensei’s house with 
the cakes in my sleeve. At noon on the next day, 
when I returned from school to take lunch, and 
looked at the package of cakes on my desk, I at once 
attacked one decorated with chocolate. And while 
I was eating it, I realized that the man and woman 


-50 


KOKORO 


who gave it to me were after all one of the few happy 
couples existing in the world. 

The autumn passed and winter came unevent' 
fully. As I visited the sensei’s house, I asked his 
wife to take care of my clothes. It was after that 
that I, who had never worn juban 1 before, began to 
wear one with a black collar over my shirt. She, 
who had no children, was glad to undertake that 
task of keeping me in order, saying that it was good 
for her, as it occupied the time which sometimes 
hung heavily on her hands. 

“This is home-made cloth, isn’t it? I have 
never had a kimono of such thick strong material 
before. It is very hard to push the needle through 
it. I have broken two needles already.” 

This complaining did not indicate that she re- 
garded the work as a nuisance. 

21 

When winter came, it so happened that I had 
to return home. My mother wrote to me saying 
that my father’s health was far from satisfactory. 
She begged me to come back home if possible, as he 
was old, though, in her opinion, we need be anxious 
about no sudden change. 

My father had had kidney trouble for several 
years. As generally happens with those over middle 


1 A kind of underwear for Japanese kimono. 


THE SENSEI AND I 31 

age, this was chronic. So he himself, as well as his 
family, firmly believed that by constant caution, he 
was in no immediate danger. And he always boasted 
to his friends that it was because of his constant 
care that he had kept in such good condition. Ac- 
cording to my mother’s letter, however, he had sud- 
denly become giddy and fainted while he was work- 
ing in the garden. “They thought it was a slight fit 
of apoplexy, and treated him accordingly. But later 
the dodtor began to wonder and diagnosed it as a 
result of the kidney trouble. 

I still had a few weeks before the winter holi- 
days when my mother’s letter came. Thinking at 
first that I could wait until the school closed, I de- 
layed for a day or two. During that time, the pidture 
of my father lying in bed and my mother worrying 
about him appeared so constantly and pained me in 
such a way that I decided to return at once. In 
order to save the time and trouble of having money 
sent from home, I decided to ask the sensei to lend 
me what was needed, at the same time saying good- 
bye to him. 

The sensei had a slight cold, and did not want 
to go out into the drawing-room, so he asked me to 
come to his study. The charming soft sunshine, 
rare in winter, shone down through the window- 
panes on the table-cloth. There was a huge brazier 
in this sun-lit room, and with the help of the steam 
from the basin boiling on it, the sensei was trying to 
ease his breathing. 


52 


KOKORO 


“ Such a slight illness as a cold is rather uncom- 
fortable, isn’t it ? I feel as if I would rather be seri- 
ously ill,” he said, and smiling bitterly, looked at 
my face. 

The sensei had never been seriously ill before, 
and I was almost tempted to laugh when I heard 
him say this. 

“ I can put up with a cold, but I have no desire 
for more serious illness. It is the same with you, 
isn’t it? If you ever had a serious disease, you 
would understand it.” 

“ Do you think so ? But I should rather be 
taken seriously ill and die.” 

I did not pay much attention to what he said, 
but immediately telling him of my mother’s letter, 
asked him if he would lend me some money. 

“ O then you need it at once, don’t you ? But 
I think we have that much in our house, so you can 
have it now.” 

The sensei called his wife, and asked her to bring 
the money. When she took the bank-notes out of 
a drawer of some cabinet in the back-room, she put 
them in a white paper in a neat pile and said, “ O 
I am very sorry. You must be anxious about your 
father.” 

“ Did he faint many times ? ” The sensei asked. 

“ It didn’t say so in the letter. But do they 
faint again and again ? ” 

“Yes.” 

For the first time I was informed that his mother- 


THE SENSEI AND I 


53 


in-law had died from the same illness. 

“ He will not recover, anyhow,” I said. 

“ Perhaps not. If I could take his place, I would, 
willingly. — Is his stomach upset ? ” 

“ O I am not sure. But it didn’t say so in the 
letter, so perhaps not.” 

“ Is that so ? Then he is all right yet,” his wife 
observed. 

I left Tokyo that night. 

22 

My father was not so ill as I expected. When 
I reached home, however, he sat cross-legged on his 
bed, and said, “ They are so worried about me that 
I am obliged to keep still like this. But really, I 
can get up now.” On the next day, he insisted on 
having his bed put away, ignoring my mother’s en- 
treaties. As she reludrantly folded the heavy quilts, 
my mother said, “ Your father has become much 
brighter since you came back.” But his energy did 
not appear unnatural. 

My elder brother’s profession took him to far- 
away Kyushu, and it was not easy for him to come 
and see his parents, except on the most important 
occasions. My younger sister was married, and 
lived in another province. It was impossible for 
her, too, to return home in time, when anything 
happened. Of the three children, I was the most 
available. And it was a great comfort to my father 


54 


KOKORO 


that I came back home before the vacation, obeying 
my mother and sacrificing my lectures. 

“ I am very sorry to have disturbed your study 
for such a slight illness as this. Your mother made 
too much fuss about it in her letter,” he said. Not 
only by these words, but also by having the bed- 
clothes put away, he tried to show that he was as 
well as he had been before. ^ 

“ Father, you must take particular care, lest you 
should be taken ill again.” He listened to my warn- 
ing with satisfaction, but not seriously, and replied. 

“ O no, I am all right, I need only be careful as 
usual.” 

In fact, he looked quite all right. He walked 
about the house at will, and never became breathless 
or giddy. Only his colour did not look normal, 
but as that was usual with him, we scarcely noticed it. 

I wrote to the sensei, and thanked him for his 
kindness in lending me the money, and told him that 
I would bring it back when I returned to Tokyo in 
January. I informed him that my father was better 
than I had expected, that there might be no need for 
us to worry at present, and that he neither felt dizzy, 
nor had any trouble with his stomach. But it was 
only on the last page that I inquired about his cold, 
because I did not think it the least bit serious. 

When I posted that letter, I never dreamed that 
he would answer. I talked with my parents about 
the sensei, and thought of his study which was in far- 
away Tokyo. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


55 


“ You had better take some dried mushrooms 
as a present to him when you go to Tokyo next time.” 

“ Yes, but I wonder if he eats things like that.” 

“ They are not especially good, but 1 suppose 
no one actually dislikes them.” 

It was a shock to me to think of the sensei in 
connection with the mundane dried mushrooms. 

When I received an answer to my letter, I was 
surprised, especially when I read it, for he wrote 
about nothing in particular. I concluded that he 
wrote to me only from kindness, and that simple 
letter made me very happy. It was in fadt the first 
letter that I received from him. 

When I speak like this, it may make the readers 
think that we were later accustomed to write to each 
other often. But it was not so. He never wrote 
to me much. I got only two letters from him in all 
his life, one, this simple answer, and the other, a 
very long one which he addressed exclusively to me 
just before his death. 

As it was not good for his illness to take ex- 
ercise, my father scarcely went out, though he left 
his bed. Once when he went into the garden in 
the afternoon of a very calm day, I was with him, 
lest something might happen to him. I offered him 
my shoulder on which to rest, but he smilingly re- 
fused it. 

23 

In order to amuse my father, I often sat with 


56 


KOKORO 


him at Japanese chess. It was so cold that we had 
no courage to drag ourselves away from the warm 
sunken fireplace with its wadded covering, so we 
placed the chess-board on the quilt and played com- 
fortably. We did not even take our hands out, and 
as it came to our turn to play, we would take one 
hand from under the cover, make a move and put 
it back. Sometimes we lost some of the chessmen, 
and did not know it until the next game. It was 
my mother who usually found them in the ashes, 
and picked them out with the tongs, which was quite 
a ridiculous sight. , 

“We cannot play go 1 on the sunken fireplace, 
because the board is raised too high on its legs. But 
we can play chess comfortably here. It is very con- 
venient for us lazy men. Let us play once more.” 

Whenever my father won, he always insisted 
upon another game. And so he did even when he 
did not win. He loved to play chess at the fireplace, 
and it did not matter to him whether he won or 
not. I was moderately diverted by this old men’s 
amusement as long as it was new. But as we went 
on day after day, it was hardly exciting enough to 
satisfy my youthful energy. I often stretched my 
arms and even yawned. 

I thought of Tokyo. I heard the beat of my 
rich blood in the depth of my heart, which seemed 
to be repeating, “ Do something, do something.” 

1 A kind, of indoor game which is a little different from Japanese 
chess. ' 


THE SENSEI AND I 


57 


Strangely enough I felt from some subtle conscious- 
ness that this sound of the heart was strengthened 
by the sensei’s existence. 

I contrasted my father with the sensei. From 
the world’s point of view, both were so quiet that 
their lives did not even make a stir. Unknown and 
disregarded, theirs were the most insignificant ex- 
istence in the world. __ Yet my father, who loved to 
play chess, was unsatisfactory to me even as a com- 
panion for games. But the sensei , whom I never 
visited for amusement, influenced my mind far more 
strongly than those friends with whom I played. As 
the word mind is too cold an expression, I would 
rather say my heart. If I had said in those days 
that the sensei’s power was penetrating my flesh, or 
his life was flowing in my blood, it would never have 
sounded at all extravagant to me.' I was surprised 
as if I had discovered a great truth when it suddenly 
occurred to me that my father was my real father, 
and the sensei was obviously no blood-relation to me. 

As I began to grow tired of my surroundings, 
my parents, too, gradually lost the fresh interest they 
had felt in me. I think every student who returns 
home for the summer holiday has this experience. 
After about a week of extreme welcome and enter- 
tainment, the family is apt to become gradually in- 
different, until the student feels neglected as if he 
were not wanted. My parents’ regard, too, passed 
its height during my stay. Besides, whenever I re- 
turned from Tokyo, I brought home something 


58 


KOKORO 


strange, which neither my father nor my mother 
could understand. Like a Christian bringing the 
influence of his strange dodtrine to a Confucian’s 
home in old days, what I brought from Tokyo did 
not harmonize with my parents’ way of life. Of 
course 1 tried to conceal this strange thing from them, 
but as it belonged to me like a part of my body, they 
could not miss seeing it in spite of all I could do. 
Consequently, I began to feel uncomfortable, and 
longed to return to Tokyo as soon as possible. 

■ My father’s illness remained about the same. 
He did not seem to become worse or better. As a 
precaution we sent for a doctor from the distant 
town, and asked him to examine the patient care- 
fully, but his diagnosis was the same as the other’s, 
no change being perceived. I decided to leave home 
a few days before the term opened. By the perver- 
sity of human feelings, both my father and my mother 
objected to this plan. 

“ Are you going so soon ? Isn’t it too early ? ” 
my mother said. 

“ You won’t be late, if you stay four or five 
days more,” my father observed. 

But I did not change the day that I had fixed 
for my departure. 

24 

When I returned to Tokyo, the gay New Year’s 
decorations had been already removed. The street 


THE SENSEI AND I 


59 


was exposed to the chilly wind, and not a vestige of 
the New Year gaiety was anywhere to be seen. 

Soon after my arrival I went to see the sensei, 
to return the money he had lent me. 1 took the 
dried mushrooms with me, which I put in front of 
his wife, saying that they were my mother’s present, 
for it seemed rather strange to give them to her with- 
out a word. They were in a new cake box. Thank- 
ing me politely, she withdrew with the box, and was 
surprised to find how light it was, and asked me, 
“ What kind of cakes are these ? ” On such an in- 
timate occasion as this, she showed a childlike can- 
did disposition. 

Both she and the sensei asked me many ques- 
tions about my father. He said, “ Indeed, judging 
from what you say, he does not appear to be in any 
danger now. But with that disease, you must be 
very careful.” The sensei knew far more about 
kidney trouble than I did. 

“ It is one of the marked characteristics of that 
particular trouble that the patient is unconscious of 
his condition. An officer that I knew who was suf- 
fering from it, died quite suddenly, so suddenly that 
we could not believe that he was dead. Even his 
wife, who was sleeping in the same room, was not 
aware when he died. At midnight he wakened his 
wife saying that he was in pain, then they Went to 
sleep again, and in the morning, he was found dead. 
His wife thought all the time that he was sound 
asleep beside her.” 


60 • 


KOKORO 


I had been optimistic up to this moment, but 
this made me suddenly uneasy. 

“ Do you think it will be the same with my 
father ? We cannot say no, can we ? ” 

“ What does the doctor say ? ” 

“ He says he cannot be well again, but there 
may be no sudden change for the time being.” 

“ Then he may be all right, if the dodtor diag- 
nosed it in that way. The man that I spoke of was 
one who had been ignorant of his illness. Besides 
he was a very rash soldier.” 

I was comforted a little. The sensei, who was 
watching the change in me, added. 

“ But sick or well, a human being is delicate. 
We cannot tell when, by what, and in what way we 
may die.” 

“Are you, too, thinking about such things? ” 
“ Yes, even I, who am always well, sometimes 
think about it.” 

A shadow of a smile appeared about his mouth. 
“ Don’t people often die suddenly, quite natu- 
rally ? And do not some quit this world in a mo- 
ment, using unnatural means ? ” 

“ What do you mean ? ” 

“ It is not clear to me, but I think all who com- 
mit suicide are using unnatural means. Don’t you 
think so ? ” 

“ Then those who are killed by others, too, die 
by such means, don’t they ? ” 

“ I never thought of that. But that is true, too.” 


THE SENSEI AND I 


61 


I left him then. I did not worry much about 
my father’s illness. The sensei’s words about natural 
and unnatural death left a very slight impression, 
which disappeared soon and did not trouble my 
mind. I had to begin to think seriously about my 
graduation essay, which 1 had made several unsuc- 
cessful attempts to write. 

25 

I was to graduate from the university in the 
following June, so according to regulations, I had to 
finish this essay by the end of April. Bending my 
fingers, I counted the months that remained, and 
could not help feeling dubious about my own self- 
confidence. My class-mates looked very busy. For 
a long time, they had been collecting the materials, 
and making notes. I seemed to be the only one 
who had done nothing. I only resolved that I would 
begin in earnest with the New Year. I began to 
work with that resolution, and soon ran into an 
obstacle. I, who, picturing in the air a gigantic 
thesis, had imagined that the outline had almost 
been made up in my mind, sat at my desk holding 
my head in dismay. Then 1 reduced the scope of 
the work and to save the trouble of arranging the 
thoughts systematically, I decided to colled: materials 
found in books, and add the conclusion required. 

' The topic that I had chosen was closely related 
to the sensei’s special subject. When I had asked 


62 


KOKORO 


him his opinion about this choice, he had approved 
it. In somewhat of a panic, I went to see him at once, 
and asked him the titles of the books I had to read. 
The sensei gladly gave me all the knowledge that he 
had, and added that he would lend me two or three 
necessary books. Yet, the sensei would never put 
himself in the position of a supervisor. 

“ I haven’t read much recently, so I don’t know 
anything new. , You had better ask your professor,” 
he said. I suddenly remembered that I had heard 
from his wife that he had once been a great reader, 
but that later, for some reason, he seemed to have 
ceased to be attracted by books. I put my essay 
aside, and asked. 

“ Sensei, why aren’t you interested in books any 
more ? ” 

“I don’t know. Probably because 1 have come 
to the conclusion that books can’t make me wiser. 
And — ” 

“ And what ? Have you any other reason ? ” 

“ Yes,’ but it is not important. I used to feel 
ashamed when there was anything that I did not 
know, when I was with other people or was asked 
some question. But recently, I have begun to re- 
gard ignorance as a minor defedt, so I have become 
unable to pull myself together and read as much as 
I could. In short, I have grown old.” 

The sensei’s words were rather calm. He did 
not speak with the bitterness of one who had turned 
his back on the world, so I was not strongly affedted. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


63 


And of course I was not in the least convinced that 
he was in his dotage, nor did I particularly admire 
his attitude. In this state of mind, I returned home. 

From that time, with red eyes, I was tortured 
like a lunatic, haunted by the essay. I inquired of 
those who were one year my senior how they had 
graduated. One of them said that he had hurried 
to the university office in a rickshaw on the closing 
day, and had been just in time. Another told me 
that he had handed in the essay about fifteen minutes 
past five, and that it was only by the kindness of 
his professor that he had escaped being turned down. 
I felt uneasy, but at the same time I screwed up my 
courage. Day after day, I sat at my desk and worked 
as long as my energy lasted. Or in the dusky stack- 
room 1 surveyed the tall book-cases. Like a col- 
lector trying to find some curios, I scanned the titles 
of the books written in gold. 

As the plum-blossoms began to bloom, the 
freezing north wind gradually veered to the south. 
Then, rumours of cherry-blossoms reached my ears. 
But, like a carriage-horse, I only looked at what was 
in front of me, whipped by the essay. I did not call 
on the sensei until the end of April when the work 
was finished. 

26 

It was at the beginning of summer that I was 
emancipated from study, when in place of the double 
cherry-blossoms, a mist of delicate green leaves began 


64 


KOKORO 


to cover the branches. With the heart of a little 
bird which had flown away from a cage, I clapped 
my wings in freedom, surveying the wide world. I 
went at once to the sensei. As I walked along, I was 
attracted by the fresh buds on the blackish branches 
of the hedge of aegle sepiaria, and by the bright 
reddish-brown leaves softly reflecting the sunshine 
on the bare pomegranate-tree. I felt as if I were 
seeing them for the first time in my life. 

The sensei, looking at my happy face, said, “ Did 
you finish your essay 1 Congratulations.” And I 
replied, “ Yes, it’s finished, thank goodness. I have 
nothing to do now.” 

In fact, at that time, I was so happy that I felt 
as if I had completed my life’s work, and there was 
nothing left for me but enjoyment. I was so pleased 
with my essay that I did not hesitate to speak about 
it to the sensei. He listened to me in his usual way, 
saying, “ O yes,” or “ Is that so ? ” but made no 
further comment at all. I was discouraged, rather 
than displeased.. Yet on that day, my spirit was so 
light that I even attempted to stir up the sensei who 
seemed to me terribly slow. I tried to take him out 
into the expanse of nature which had begun to 
revive with beautiful green. 

“ Sensei, let us go for a walk. It’s much nicer 
to be out of doors.” 

“ Where shall we go 1 ” 

I did not care where, I only wanted to go to the 
suburbs with him. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


65 


An hour later, the sensei and I had left the city 
as I purposed, and were walking in a quiet place 
which resembled at the same time both a small town 
and a village. I picked a tender young leaf from 
the hedge of Chinese hawthorns, made a leaf-flute, 
and began to blow. I had once known a boy from 
Kagoshima, from whom I had caught the art of 
playing the leaf-flute, so I was more or less of an 
expert. While I proudly exhibited my ability, the 
sensei walked on indifferently, without looking at 
me. 

Soon we came to a mansion on a hill, so sur- 
rounded by trees that it looked as if the young leaves 
had locked it up. Glancing at the plate on the gate, 
which bore the name So-and-so Garden, we knew 
that it must belong to some institution. Gazing at 
the entrance where a gentle slope began, the sensei 
asked if we should go in, and I replied at once, “ I 
suppose it is a nursery, isn’t it Z ” 

Winding our way upwards through the planta- 
tion, we found a house on the left. The sliding- 
doors were all open, but not a soul could be seen ; 
the empty house looked large, and only the goldfish 
in the basin under the eaves moved to and fro. 

“ How quiet ! May we go on without permis- 
sion ? ” the sensei observed. 

“ I think we can,” 1 replied. 

We proceeded. But there was not a soul to be 
seen. The flaming azaleas were in full bloom. The 
sensei pointed to a tali one of orange hue, and said : 


66 


KOKORO 


“ I suppose this is kirishima .” 1 

A garden of peonies covered a plot about twenty 
feet square, but it was too early for the flowers. The 
sensei stretched his limbs on an old Japanese bench 
by the peony garden, and I sat down on the edge and 
smoked. The sensei was looking into the clear blue 
sky, and I was absorbed by the leaves around me. 
Fixing my eyes on them, I wondered at the variety 
of their colours. Not a single leaf had the same 
colour as another even on one maple-tree. There 
was a breeze, and the sensei’s hat, perched on the top 
of a young cedar, fell to the ground. 

27 

I snatched the hat from the ground, and flick- 
ing off some red clay, said. “ Sensei, your hat fell 
down.” 

“ O thanks.” 

The sensei half raised his body and took the 
hat, then still in this half recumbent posture, he 
asked me a strange question. 

“ Is your father well off, may I ask ? ” 

“ No, he has very little property.” 

“ It seems rude to question you further, but 
about how much ? ” 

“ He has a little land and some rice-fields, but 
almost no money, I think.” 


1 A kind of azalea. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


67 


This was the first time that the sensei had ever 
referred seriously to the economic condition of my 
family. And of course I, on my part, had never 
asked him anything about his property. When I 
first knew him, I had wondered how he had managed 
to live without seeming to do anything. And since 
then, I had never been able to satisfy myself on the 
subjedt. But I had never been able to bring myself 
to ask about anything so personal. In my mind, 
which had been feasting upon the soft colour of the 
leaves, this doubt now was revived. 

“ And what about you, Sensei i How much 
property have you i ” 

“ Do I look like a man of property ? ” 

The sensei was always rather simple in his dress. 
His family was very small, so his house was not 
large. But it was clear even to an outsider like me 
that he was in comfortable circumstances. There 
was no trace of frugality even though we could 
hardly call his method of living luxurious. 

“ Yes, you appear so to me,” I replied. 

“ Of course I have something. But I can hardly 
be called a man of wealth. If I were, I should build 
a bigger house.” 

He had got up and was sitting cross-legged on 
the bench. He paused, and began to draw with his 
bamboo stick some figures on the ground which 
looked like circles. Then he placed his stick eredt 
as if it were fastened in the earth, and said ; “ But 



68 


KOKORO 


As he said this partly to himself, I did not 
answer. 

“ I say, I was once wealthy,” he repeated, this 
time apparently addressing me, and smiled, looking 
at my face. But I was still silent, because I did not 
know what to say. Then the sensei asked, “ How 
is your father now ? ” 

I had not heard anything about him since Janu- 
ary. The simple note which came with the money 
order every month was written by him as usual, but 
there was nothing about his illness. Besides his 
writing was steady, showing no indications of the 
shaky hand that usually goes with kidney trouble. 

“ He never refers to it in his letters. I think 
he is all right.” 

“ I am very glad if that is really so. — But since 
he has that illness — ” 

“I suppose it is hopeless after all, isn’t it? 
Since they say nothing about it I suppose he is in 
no immediate danger.” 

“ Yes ? ” 

I supposed what he asked about my father’s 
condition and his property was simply a matter of 
ordinary conversation, which had occurred to his 
mind at the time. But there was a significance be- 
hind his questions, which closely connected the 
former with the latter. I, who lacked his experience, 
had of course no idea of this. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


69 


28 : 

“ If your father has some property, you had 
better ask him to divide it now. You may think 
this advice is intrusive, but you had better do it. It 
is much better to get your share while he is alive. 
It is usually the property that creates complications 
in families after the death of the father.” 

“ Yes.” 

I did not pay much attention to what he said. 

I was sure that none of my family was disturbed by 
such a matter or in this way. Besides this advice 
wds so practical coming from the sensei that I was 
rather surprised. But my usual regard for my seniors 
kept me silent. 

“ Forgive me for speaking as if I expected your 
father to die. But we are mortal. Even those of 
us who seem in perfect health can never know when 
they will die.” 

The sensei’s tone was unusually bitter. 

“OI don’t mind it at all,” I replied. 

“ How many brothers and sisters have you ? ” 
Then he asked about the members of my family and 
relatives including my uncles and aunts, and added : 

“ Are they all honest ? ” 

“ There seems to be no one who is particularly 
dishonest, for most of them are country-people.” 

“ Why do you think countrymen are specially 
noted for honesty ? ” 

I was puzzled by this cross-examination. But 


70 


KOKORO 


he gave me no time to think out an answer. 

“ I should say that countrymen are more dan- 
gerous than those in cities. You said that there is 
no villain among your relations, but do you think 
there are any people who are naturally wicked ? No, 
there is no such thing as a natural villain. People 
are usually good, at least normally good. The hor- 
rible thing is that these good ordinary people become 
villains as the result of some sudden circumstance. 
So we have always to be careful.” 

' It seemed to be impossible for him to stop. 
Again I wanted to say something, when suddenly a 
dog began to bark. The sensei and I, frightened, 
looked back. 

Near the plantation of young cedars beside and 
behind the bench, bamboo clumps grew about eleven 
feet square, so thick that they seemed to hide the 
ground. The dog, putting his head in and out from 
the bamboo clumps, barked loudly. Then a boy 
about ten years old came running up, and scolded the 
dog. Without taking off his black cap with its school 
badge, he crossed over to the sensei, and bowed. 

“ Didn’t you see anyone in our house when you 
came here, sir ? ” He asked. 

“ No, no one.” 

“But Mother and Sister were in the back- 
room.” 

“ O were they ? ” 

“ Yes, sir, you had better say ‘ good afternoon ’ 
to them, and then come in.” 


THE SENSEI AND I 


71 ' 


The sensei smiled bitterly. He took his purse 
from his bosom, and put a five sen coin in the boy’s 
hand. 

“ Say to your mother that we want to take a 
rest here. Will you i ” 

The boy, with his clever eyes brimming with 
merriment, nodded. 

“ I am playing soldiers, I am a scout-master,” 
he said, and ran down the lane between the azaleas. 

The dog, coiling his tail higher, followed. After a 
while, two or three boys of the same age ran toward 
the scout-master. 

29 othfcer*» 

Interrupted by the boy and the dog, we could 
not finish what we had been talking about. Con- 
sequently I could not make head or tail of what he 
said. I was entirely free from anxiety concerning 
my father’s property, about which he felt so uneasy. 

It was natural for one of my disposition and in my 
circumstances to have no room in the mind for such 
material matters. Perhaps it was because of my 
youth which knew little of the world, and of my 
having no experience of real want ; at any rate, the 
questions about money did not interest me at all. 

The only thing that I wanted to have thoroughly 
explained was what he said about a human being 
becoming wicked as the result of some sudden cir- 
cumstance. I understood the words, but I wanted 


72 


KOKORO 


to know more about their true meaning. 

After the boy and the dog had left, the vast 
garden of young leaves regained its quiet, and we 
sat still, as if shut up in silence. Then the brilliant 
sky gradually faded. Almost all the trees in front 
of us were maples, and the delicate green leaves 
opened on their branches, bright and watery. But 
those leaves seemed to begin to look darker. I heard 
a waggon rumbling along the far-away road, and 
imagined a villager carrying plants and vegetables to 
a local fete. The sensei, too, heard it, and rose like 
a man awakened from a reverie. 

“Let’s be going home now. The days have 
begun to lengthen, but as we are thus idling, it has 
become dark, though we don’t know how many 
hours have passed.” 

The back of his haori 1 was covered with some- 
thing that had been on the bench, and I brushed 
away these relics of his recumbent idleness with both 
my hands. 

“ O thanks. There is no gum, is there 1 ” 

“ It is all right now.” 

“ This haori is a new one. My wife made it 
only the other day, so if I go back with it dirty, she 
will scold me. Thank you.” 

We came to the house half-way down the gentle 
slope. On the verandah, which had been deserted 
when we came, the mistress of the house and a girl 


1 A Japanese coat. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


73 


of about fifteen were winding yarn. Standing beside 
the big basin, we saluted them, and asked their 
pardon for our intrusion. “ You gave us no trouble 
at all,” she said, and thanked the sensei for his pre- 
sent to the boy. 

When we had walked about eight hundred yards 
from the gate, I resolved to continue our conversa- 
tion, and began. 

“ What did you mean when you said a little 
while ago a human being can become wicked as the 
result of some sudden circumstance ? ” 

“ What did I mean ? O nothing special. — In 
a word, it is a facft, not a theory.” 

“ I don’t care if it is a fad:. But what I want 
to ask you is what you mean by the words sudden 
circumstance. What do you call a sudden circum- 
stance ? ” 

The sensei began to laugh, as if he thought it 
hardly worth while to explain it seriously, the op- 
portunity having passed. 

“ Money, I say. When a man sees money, he 
becomes wicked at once, however noble he may be 
before.” t 

To me his answer was too matter-of-fad, and 
unsatisfadory. He had lost interest, and I too felt 
disappointed. Trying to look indifferent, I began 
to walk more rapidly, and the sensei suddenly fell 
behind. Then he said : 

“ There, you see.” 

“What?” 


74 


KOKORO 


“ Your temper, too, changes according to my 
answer, doesn’t it ? ” he said, looking at me, as I 
stopped and turned to wait for him. 

30 

At that moment I felt a little resefitment to- 
wards him. After we began to walk again side by 
side, I purposely avoided asking him what I wanted 
to know. I was not sure whether the sensei noticed 
my mood or not, but he did not seem to be in- 
fluenced by it at all. As he walked along in his 
usual silence and composure, I became aroused. I 
began to feel inclined to argue and confute him. 

“ Sensei.” 

“Yes?” 

“ You were excited a little while ago, when we 
were resting in that garden. I have seldom seen you 
so moved, so I feel as if I had seen a strange sight.” 

The sensei was silent for a while. I thought that 
I had hit my mark. But at the same time I felt per- 
haps I had missed it. Not knowing what to think, 
I decided to say no more. Then, the sensei suddenly 
drew to the side of the lane, and performed various 
natural functions, under the finely trimmed hedge. 
I blankly waited for him there. 

“I beg your pardon,” he said, and resumed his 
walk. In the end I gave up the idea of confuting 
him. Th£ road along which we were walking took 
on a lively aspect. As the slopes or flats of fields 


THE SENSEI AND I 


75 


which we had seen here and there had entirely disap- 
peared from our eyes, the houses to the right and 
left began to form regular lines. Yet at the corners 
of 'these houses were tendrils of peas clinging to 
bamboo-sticks, or plots for hens covered with wire- 
netting, looking quiet and restful. We passed by 
the pack-horses coming continuously from the city. 
I, who was apt to be attracted by these things, had 
walked off the question which had troubled my mind. 
When the sensei returned to it suddenly, I had really 
forgotten it. 

“ Did I look so much excited ? ” 

“ Not very much, but a little.” 

“ Oh, well, I don’t care if I did. Indeed it’s 
usual with me. My emotion is always aroused when 
I think of that matter. I don’t know whether you 
will agree with me or not, but I am a very revenge- 
ful man. I never forget a humiliation or loss for a 
long time, even ten or twenty years.” 

His tone was more excited than before. But 
what startled me was not the tone, but the words 
themselves. Such a confession from the sensei was 
utterly unexpected. I had never imagined that such 
tenacity was hidden in his character. I had always 
thought him rather gentle if not weak. And on his 
fragile, but noble disposition I laid the foundation 
of my admiration and love. I, who had tried to 
attack the sensei merely from a momentary whim, 
was shaken by these words. But the sensei resumed. 

*’ I was deceived. I was betrayed by my blood- 


76 KOKORO 

relations. I can never forget that. They, who seem- 
ed to be honest before my father, soon after his 
death, became wicked, unforgivably wicked. I have 
been burdened with the humiliation and loss that 
they caused me ever since my boyhood. Perhaps I 
shall never get rid of that feeling. I shall never be 
able to forget that. But I have not yet taken revenge 
upon them. Yet 1 think I am having what is more 
than a revenge on individuals. I not only hate them, 
but have learned to detest the whole human race 
which they represent. I am sure that is enough.” 

I could not even attempt to console him. 

31 

We reached no conclusion that time. I was so 
nonplussed by his attitude, that I had no courage to 
continue the subjedt. 

We took the eledtric-car from the outskirt of 
the city, but we hardly opened our mouths during 
the whole way back. We had to go different ways 
soon after we had got off. The sensei, however, was 
a different person then, and said in a tone more 
cheerful than usual, “ You are going to have an easy 
time from now to June, perhaps the pleasantest time 
in your life. So make the most of it and enjoy 
yourself.” I took off my hat, smiling, and, looking 
into his face, wondered in what obscure corner of 
his heart his hatred of the human race was hidden, 
for not the slightest vestige of this pessimism was 


THE SENSEI AND I 


77 


betrayed either in his eyes or his mouth. 

I confess I owed a great deal to the sensei in the 
realm of thought. But sometimes he seemed ut- 
terly unable to help me intellectually because of his 
persistent silence regarding his own experiences. 
Our conversations often led into blind alleys. The 
one we had just finished was in this class, and I felt 
heartily dissatisfied with the whole thing. 

Finally some days later, I confessed this to the 
sensei. He was smiling when I began. 

“ 1 shouldn’t mind if these unsatisfactory results 
were owing to a dullness of intellect. But your 
mind is perfectly clear. It is simply because you 
don’t choose to express what you feel, which doesn’t 
seem fair to me, does it 1 ” 

“ O no, you are mistaken. I am not concealing 
anything from you.” 

“ O yes, you are.” 

“ I am afraid you are confusing my intellectual 
opinions with what you would like to know of my 
past. I never try to conceal what I am thinking, 
even though it may not be worth anything. Because 
there is no necessity for concealment. But if you 
require that I should unfold all my past for your 
inspection, that is a different matter.” 

“ No, that is not it. I value your opinions be- 
cause they are the result of your past experiences. 
When I am obliged to look at one without connect- 
ing it with the other, your opinions lose their value. 
You cannot satisfy me by giving only a soulless doll.” 


78 


KOKORO 

The sensei, as if astonished, gazed at me, and 
his hand, holding a cigarette, slightly trembled. 

“ You are bold.” 

“ No, I am only serious. I am wishing with all 
my heart to learn something from life.” 

“ Even at the expense of exposing my past ? ” 

The word expose, with its terrible significance, 
suddenly beat upon my ears. I felt as if the man sit- 
ting in front of me were not the sensei whom I had 
been admiring, but a poor sinner. His face was pale. 

“ Are you really in earnest ? ” he repeated. “ My 
experience in life has taught me not to believe 
people. So, to tell the truth, I distrust you, too. 
But I don’t want to. You seem too innocent to be 
insincere. I have longed to trust someone, even 
though it is only one man, before I die. Is it pos- 
sible that you are that one single man ? Would you 
be that to me 1 Are you really in earnest ? ” 

“ Indeed if there has been anything true in my 
life, the words that I have just spoken are sincere.” 
My voice quivered. 

“ Very well,” he said, “ I will tell you. I will 
tell you all my past. But — No, it’s all right. But 
I doubt if it would be of any use to you. Perhaps 
it may be better not to tell you. But I cannot tell 
you now. Remember that. I will not tell you until 
the time comes.” 

I felt a heaviness in my mind, even after I re- 
turned to my lodging. 


V 'V'fJ***** 


THE SENSE I AND I 79 

32 

The professors did not seem to appreciate my 
essay nearly as much as I did. But I passed. On 
the graduation day, I put on an old winter suit, 
which smelt of mould from its long residence in a 
basket-trunk. When we stood in rows in the audi- 
torium, everybody looked over-heated. I did not 
know what to do with my poor body, swathed in 
wool which did not allow the slightest ventilation. 
While I stood, the handkerchief which I held was 
dripping with moisture. 

As soon as the ceremony was over, I returned 
home and stripped off the woollen clothing. Open- 
ing the window of my upstair room, I surveyed the 
world as far as I could through the hole of my gra- 
duation certificate rolled like a telescope. Then I 
threw it on my desk, and lay down in the middle 
of the room, with my limbs stretched. In that 
posture, I thought of my past, and imagined my 
future. This certificate, which stood as the bound- 
ary between my past and future, was a magic paper, 
of the greatest significance ; and at the same time 
utterly worthless. 

I was invited to dinner by the sensei on that 
day, and called on him in the evening. It had been 
long understood that I should not make another 
dinner engagement on the evening of my graduation. 

The table was laid near the verandah of the 
drawing-room, as he had promised. The stiff thick. 


80 


KOKORO 

table-cloth with its woven pattern, reflecting the 
electric light, looked beautiful and pure. When- 
ever I took dinner at his house, they always placed 
the bowls and fuxshi 1 on the white linen cloth as 
was the custom in foreign restaurants. And that 
cloth was always pure white, newly washed and 
ironed. 

“ It is the same with our collars and cuffs. It 
is far better to have a coloured table-cloth than to 
use a dirty white one. If we choose white, we must 
keep it clean,” he said. Indeed, he was rather fasti- 
dious about such things. His study was always 
orderly. That quality of his sometimes struck me 
who was rather careless about such matters. 

When I once remarked to his wife that he was 
sensitive, she replied, “ But he does not trouble him- 
self about his dress.” The sensei, who sat near her 
listening, said laughing, “ To tell the truth, I am 
fastidious spiritually. That’s why I suffer. I think 
it ,is rather stupid. Isn’t it ? ” I could not com- 
prehend whether he was referring to his sensitive 
temperament or spiritual fastidiousness. His wife, 
too, did not seem to understand. 

That night, I sat facing him at the table with 
its usual spotless cloth. His wife sat between us, 
facing the garden. 

“ Congratulations,” the sensei said, and raised 
his cup to me. These words did not produce the 


1 Chopsticks. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


81 


desired effedt. Of course it was partly due to my 
inability to be perfectly happy, but in his tone there 
was something lacking, and I felt it did not ring true. 
The sensei, laughing, raised his cup. In that smile, 
I did not perceive any perverse irony, but at the 
same time, I could not feel that he was congratulat- 
ing me from the depth of his heart. His smile told 
me that people in the world were accustomed to 
repeat congratulations on such an occasion as this. 

His wife said, “ Congratulations. Your father 
and mother must be happy.” And I suddenly re- 
membered my sick father, and thought that I would 
return home as soon as I could and show him this 
certificate. 

“ Sensei, where is your certificate ? ” I asked. 

“ Mine ? — I wonder if I put it away somewhere. 
Do you know ? ” he asked his wife. 

“ Yes, surely. We have it somewhere of course.” 

But neither of them seemed to know where it 

was. 

33 

When we began to eat the rice, his wife told 
the maid to retire, and waited on us herself. This 
seemed to be the custom of his family in entertain- 
ing informal, friendly visitors. I had felt rather un- 
comfortable at first, but gradually became accus- 
tomed to it. 

“ Tea, or rice? O you eat a great deal, don’t 


82 KOKORO 

you 1 ” Thus she sometimes in a joking way spoke 
out without reserve. But that evening, it was too 
warm to eat. 

“ Don’t you want some more ? You haven’t 
been eating much recently.” 

“ Yes, I do. Only to-night it’s rather warm.” 

She called the maid, who cleared away the table, 
and brought ice-cream and fruit instead. 

“ 1 made this myself.” 

She seemed to have plenty of time for making 
ice-cream to treat her guests. I asked for some more. 

“ You have finished your school at last. What 
are you going to do now ? ” The sensei asked, draw- 
ing his cushion toward the verandah, where he sat 
on the threshold leaning against the sliding-door. 

I realized only that I had graduated, but had 
not the slightest idea about my future profession. 
While I was hesitating, she asked, “ Are you going 
to be a teacher ? ” I was still silent. Again she 
spoke, “ An official ? ” Both the sensei and I began 
to laugh at these questions. 

“ To tell you the truth, I have no idea. In fadt, 
I have almost never thought about my profession. 
We cannot tell what kind of work suits us until we 
try, so it is natural that I cannot choose at once.” 

“ Yes, that is true. But it is only because you 
have a little property that you can be so easy-going. 
Suppose you were poor ? You could never take so 
much time.” 

I remembered some of my class-mates who had 


THE SENSEI AND I 


83 


been looking for positions in middle schools, long 
before their graduation, ahd secretly approved what 
she said, but answered. 

“ Perhaps 1 am influenced a little by Sensei.” 

“ Then I am afraid you are badly influenced.” 

The sensei laughed bitterly, and said. 

“ I don’t mind if you are influenced by me, but 
as 1 told you before, you must insist upon your 
father’s dividing his property, while he is still alive. 
If you don’t, you cannot tell what may happen.” 

I remembered that afternoon in early May when 
the azaleas were in full bloom and we had talked in 
the heart of the vast garden in the suburbs. The 
strong words he uttered in excitement repeated 
themselves in the depth of my consciousness. Not 
only strong, they were horrible, but at the same 
time enigmatical to me who knew nothing about 
his past. 

“ Are you very well-to-do ? ” I said, turning 
to his wife. 

“ Why do you ask me such a thing ? ” 

“Because Sensei would not tell me, though I 
tried to find out.” 

She smiled and looked at her husband. 

“We haven’t very much; that is why he is 
silent about it, 1 suppose.” 

“ But won’t you tell me ? Only because I want 
to know how much is required to live as comfort- 
ably as you and Sensei, before I return home and 
discuss it with my father.” 


84 


KOKORO 


The sensei, looking toward the garden, was smok- 
ing quite indifferently, so I had to appeal to his wife. 

“We have not much, just sufficient for our 
living. — At any rate, you must do something, really. 
It will not do to live idly as Sensei does.” 

“ O I am not always idling.” 

The sensei, turning only his face towards us, 
disapproved of his wife’s words. 

34 

It was past ten when I left them. I was to re- 
turn to my native place in two or three days, so as 
I turned to go, I said, “ I am afraid I shan’t be able 
to see you again for a few months.” 

“ But you will come up to Tokyo in September, 
won’t you ? ” 

My student days being over, there was no par- 
ticular reason why I should come back to Tokyo in 
September. But at any rate, I had no intention of 
spending the hot August in the capital, for I was in 
no special hurry to find some position. 

“ Yes, I suppose so.” 

“ Then good-bye, take care of yourself. Per- 
haps we shall go somewhere, for we expedt it will 
be very warm this summer. If we do go, we will 
send you a picture postcard,” his wife said. 

“ Where are you going ? ” 

The sensei was listening to this conversation, 
smiling, and said. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


85 


“ We haven’t decided even whether we will go 
or not.” 

When I turned to leave my seat, the sensei sud- 
denly asked, “ By the way, how is your father ? ” 1 
hardly knew anything about my father’s condition. 
I thought that he was about the same, because he 
had not referred to it in his letters. 

“ You musn’t take your eyes off that disease. 
If it turns to uraemia it will be hopeless.” 

I could not understand either the word uraemia 
or its meaning. When I had talked with the doctor 
in the winter, he had not used such a word. 

“ Really, you must take very good care of him,” 
his wife said, “ if it attacks the brain, it will be all 
over. Really, it is no laughing matter.” 

For I, who had no experience of losing anyone 
from this disease, was smiling, though some un- 
easiness held my heart. 

“ As it is said to be hopeless, we cannot do any- 
thing by anxiety.” 

“ If you can think like that, we have nothing 
to say.” 

She said this in a gloomy tone and looked down. 
She must have been reminded -of her mother who 
had died from the same illness long ago. I, too, 
became really sorry about my father. 

Suddenly the sensei turned to his wife. 

“ Shizu, do you think you will die before I do ? ” 

“Why?” 

“I don’t know. I just wonder. I wonder if I 


86 


KOKORO 


shall be the first. 'It is generally accepted in this 
world that husbands should die first, isn’t it ? ” 

“ O it’s not always so. But as the men are 
generally older than their wives — ” 

“ Therefore they die before their wives, don’t 
they ? According to that, then I am to go to Eter- 
nity before you.” 

“ No, you are an exception.” 

“Ami?” 

“ Because you are very strong. You have almost 
never been ill, have you ? So 1 shall surely be the 
first to die.” 

“ Really?” 

“ Of course.” 

The sensei looked at me, and I laughed. 

“ But if I should go first, what would you do ? ” 

“ What would I do ? — ” 

She hesitated. A sense of sadness caused by 
his imaginary death seemed to have visited her heart. 
But when she raised her head again, she had re- 
covered herself. 

“O I couldn’t do anything, could I ? We can 
never know when we are going to die, nor can we 
stop the hand of Death.” 

She, glancing deliberately at me, said this in a 
lighter tone. 

35 

I resumed my seat, and listened to this conver- 
sation. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


87 


“ What do you think ? ” the sensei asked. 

The question whether the sensei would die first 
was of course beyond me. I only smiled. 

“ How can I tell ? ” 

“ Yes, we cannot help our natural death. The 
length of our lives is fixed even from the time of 
our birth. Sensei’s father and mother died almost 
at the same time.” 

“ Did they die on the same day ? ” 

“ O no, not exactly, but almost on the same 
day. But they died one after another.” 

This information was new to me. I wondered. 

“ How did it happen that they died like that ? ” 

. She was going to answer my question, when 
her husband stopped her. 

“ Don’t talk about such a thing. It’s not in- 
teresting.” 

He purposely flapped the fan in his hand, and 
turned to his wife again. 

“ Shizu, I will give you this house when I die.” 

She began to laugh. 

“ Then won’t you give me the land, too ? ” 

“ O no, I cannot, it’s not mine, you know. But 
instead, I will give you all I have.” 

“ Thank you. But I don’t need your foreign 
books, do 1 1 ” 

“ You can sell them to a second-hand book- 
seller.” 

“ How much could I get for them ? ” 

The sensei did not answer. But he continued 


I 


88 KOKORO 

on the subjedt of his death, which neither his wife 
nor I could feel as a reality. And his death was 
always supposed to take place before his wife’s. At 
first she pretended to take it lightly and talked idly. 
But gradually it affedted her sensitive heart. 

“ How many times are you going to repeat ‘ if 
I die ’ ? Please don’t do it any more. It’s ominous 
to talk about such a thing. If you were to die, I 
would do everything according to your ypish. Isn’t 
that enough ? ” 

The sensei, looking at the garden, laughed. But 
he stopped at once talking about the thing that had 
made her unhappy. As it was late, I rose to go at 
once. He and his wife followed me to the entrance. 

“ Take care of your father,” she said. 

“ Then I shall meet you in September,” he said. 

I bowed and stepped out' of the entrance-door. 
The dense fragrant olive between the entrance- 
door and the gate stretched its branches in the dark, 
as if trying to block my way. I walked two or three 
steps, and looking at those branches covered with 
blackish leaves, thought of the flowers and their 
perfume in the cofciing autumn. I had long regarded 
this fragrant olive and his house as inseparable ex- 
istences. When I casually stood in front of it and 
imagined the autumn when I should come here 
again, the eledtric light that had been shining from 
the lattice suddenly went out. The sensei and his 
wife seemed to have withdrawn. I went out alone 
into the dark lane. 


THE SENSEI AND I 


89 


I did not return to my lodging at once. Apart 
from the fadt that I had some shopping to do in 
Tokyo, my stomach stuffed with delicacies required 
some exercise, I walked toward the lively town where 
it was still early. Among the men and the women 
idly moving and bustling, I found one of my friends 
who had graduated with me that day. He urged 
me to go to a bar, where I listened to his tall talk 
which was like the foam on beer. It was past twelve 
when I at last reached my room. 

36 

On the next day, in spite of the heat, I went 
around purchasing the things I had been requested 
to bring home. When I received the letter asking 
me to buy these things, I did not think it a nuisance. 
But when I was actually doing it, I felt it extremely 
troublesome. Wiping my perspiring face in the 
electric-car, I hated those countrymen who did not 
feel a bit sorry for taking my time and troubling me 
so much. 

I had no idea of idling away this summer, and 
I had made my schedule. In order to carry out my 
programme I had to get some necessary books, and 
I resolved to spend half a day on the first floor of 
Maruzen. I stood in front of the book-cases contain- 
ing those books which were closely related to my 
special subject, and scrutinized them from top to 
bottom. 


90 


KOKORO 


The purchase that troubled me most was that 
of women’s ornamental neckbands. The shopboy 
showed me an enormous number, but I did not 
know which ones to choose, and was at a loss. Be- 
sides, the prices were quite inconsistent. The one 
I thought cheap was amazingly dear, and the other 
which I could not venture to ask the price, because 
I thought it dear, was unexpectedly cheap. And I 
was annoyed, because I could not perceive why this 
difference should exist, try as I might to compare 
them. I was utterly perplexed, and repented that 
I had not asked the sensei’s wife to perform this task 
for me. 

I bought a suitcase. It was of course a cheap 
Japanese one, but enough to overawe country-people, 
with its glittering metal fittings. This was at my 
mother’s request. She had taken the trouble to 
write to me saying that if I graduated I should get a 
new suitcase and return home with my presents in it. 
I could not help laughing when I read that letter. It 
was not because I could not understand my mother’s 
intention, but rather because the idea appealed to 
me as a sort of joke. 

As I had told the sensei and his wife, I left 
Tokyo on the third day from that night. I, who 
had got much information from the sensei about my 
father’s illness since winter, was, as it were, charged 
with the duty of taking care of him. But it did not 
weigh on my mind, instead, I felt sorry for my 
mother, fancying her left alone. It must have been 


THE SENSEI AND 1 


91 


that I was expecting my father’s death in some corner 
of my mind. When I wrote to my brother in Kyu- 
shu, I described his condition as hopeless. Once 
I advised him even to make time and come home to 
see him this summer, adding in sentimental words 
that they must feel helpless in that state, the old 
man and woman living quite alone, which should 
make us, their children, feel deep sympathy for them. 
In fadt, I wrote as I thought. But when I finished 
writing, my feelings were quite different. 

I contemplated that inconsistency of my heart 
in the train, and it began to seem that I was an in- 
sincere, changeable fellow, which made me uncom- 
fortable. I thought of the sensei and his wife, es- 
pecially the conversation at dinner three days before. 

“ Which one is to die first ? ” 

Sitting alone, I repeated the question over and 
over again, and I concluded that no one could answer 
that question with confidence. But if it had been 
exadtly known, what would the sensei have done ? 
What would she have done? Probably nothing, 
but live on in the same manner as before (just as 
I could not feel any strong emotion at my father’s 
approaching death at home). How frail human be- 
ings seemed ! I regretted that they were born with 
a feeling of shallowness in their hearts of which 
they never seemed to get rid. 


PART II 

MY PARENTS AND I 


W HEN I reached home, I was surprised to 
find my father very little changed. 

“ O you have come at last. I am delighted you 
have graduated. But wait, till I wash my face.” 

He had been doing something in the garden, 
wearing an old straw hat with a dirty handkerchief 
tucked in at the back and hanging like a curtain to 
protedt the back of his neck from the sun. As he 
went round to the well in the back yard, the hand- 
kerchief fluttered. 

My father’s obvious delight at my graduation 
made me a little ashamed, for I looked upon it 
simply as the ordinary experience of any university 
student. 

“ 1 am delighted you have graduated,” he re- 
peated over and over again. \ compared his look 
of pleasure with the expression on /the sensei’s face 
when he had said “ Congratulations ” at his table on 
the evening of my graduation. To me the unspoken 
depreciation conveyed in the congratulations of the 
sensei bespoke a nobler point of view than the un- 
restrained rapture of my father ; the latter had the 
effedt of making me a little ashamed of His eountri- 


MY PARENTS AND I 


93 


fied ways which clearly resulted from ignorance. 

“ O well, it is nothing to be so happy about. 
Hundreds of people graduate every year,” I said at 
last. My father looked a little annoyed and said : 

“Yes, of course. It is not the fad: of your 
having graduated that pleased me so much. It is 
more than that. If only you can understand it — ” 
I tried to make him explain further. He hesitated 
at first, but finally confessed. 

“ Well, in a word, 1 am the happy person. You 
know I am ill. When you were here last winter, I 
was almost certain that I should die in three or four 
months. But most luckily here I am still, sound of 
limb, able to move about, and you have graduated. 
That is why I am glad. Isn’t it natural for a father 
to be happy when his son whom he has brought up 
finally graduates from the university while he is still 
alive 1 Probably your ideals in life are so great 
that your graduation seems nothing, so my raptures 
make you impatient. But try to think about it from 
my point of view. It is a little different. Yes, your 
graduation is a satisfaction to me, if not to you. 
Can’t you see 1 ” 

I could think of nothing to say, feeling too 
much ashamed to beg his pardon, and could only 
sit, with downcast eyes. My father, not at all wor- 
ried by his illness, seemed to have been prepared 
for death. Moreover, he seemed to have expected 
that it would take place before my graduation. How 
stupid, I had been not to have felt my father’s re- 


94 


KOKORO 


signation ! How natural it was for him with such an 
outlook to, be greatly affected 1 I took the certificate 
out of my suitcase, and showed it to my parents, as 
if it had been a treasure. Having been crushed in 
the suitcase, it had lost its original shape, and my 
father carefully smoothed it out. 

“ You should have carried this in your hand,” 
he said. 

“ If you had packed it in padding, it would have 
been better,” remarked my mother who was sitting 
beside him. 

He looked at it a while, then going to the alcove, 
placed the certificate in the very centre where every- 
one could see it. I felt quite different from my 
ordinary self, and found it utterly impossible to 
protest. So in silence I let my father do what he 
liked. The crumpled certificate of torinoko 1 paper 
could not easily be mended even by my father’s ef- 
forts. As soon as it was put in a good position, it 
curled to its former shape and fell down. 

2 

Later I asked my mother privately about my 
father’s condition, saying, “ Father goes to the gar- 
den, and works, as if he were quite well. But is he 
really all right 1 ” 

“O yes, he seems to have no trouble at all. 


1 A kind of Japanese paper. 


MY PARENTS AND 1 


95 


Perhaps he is better now.” I thought her remark- 
ably unconcerned. After the manner of a woman 
living in the woods and fields away from the towns, 
she was quite ignorant. But she had been so fright- 
ened and anxious the last time he had fallen. I 
wondered. 

“ But last winter the doctor said it was hope- 
less, didn’t he ? ” 

“Yes, that is why I think our bodies are so 
wonderful. He, who was said to be so ill, is quite 
strong now. I was anxious about him at first, and 
tried to keep him quiet. But he is so wilful. He 
takes care of himself, but he is stubborn. When 
he thinks himself well, he never listens to what I 
say, no, never.” 

I remembered how he had insisted last winter on 
shaving, with his bed-clothes cleared away. When 
1 remembered his words, “ O I am all right now. 
Your mother makes too much fuss about me,” I did 
not have the heart to blame my mother alone. 
Though I was on the point of saying, “ But those 
about him must be careful,” I hesitated, and was 
silent. Only, I told her all I knew about kidney 
trouble, as if she were my pupil, though most of 
this information was what I had got from the sensei 
and his wife. But it did not seem to affedt her. All 
she said was, “ O by the same illness ? I am sorry 
to hear that. How old was she when she died ? ” 

As it was no use speaking to my mother, I went 
straight to my father. He received my warnings 


96 


KOKORO 


more seriously tlian my mother. 

“ Yes, you are right. It is exactly so. But at 
any rate my body belongs to me, and to no one 
else, and I ought to know best how to take care of 
it, because I have so much experience.” 

When my mother heard that, she laughed bit- 
terly, and said, “ There, you see ! ” 

“ But Father is at least prepared for the worst. 
That is why he is so glad about my graduation. He 
said so himself, that he is happy because I returned 
home with the certificate while he is still alive, when 
he expected to die before that.” 

“ But, my dear, he only says so ; he thinks in 
his mind that he is all right.” 

“ Really ? ” 

“ Yes, to be sure, he is thinking he will live for 
ten or twenty years more, though sometimes he says 
things like this : * I think I shall die soon. If I die, 
what will you do ? Shall you live on in this house 
quite alone ? * ” 

Suddenly I imagined a vast old country house 
with my mother left alone. After my father disap- 
peared from this house, could we manage to keep 
it as before ? What would my brother do ? What 
would my mother say ? Could I, thinking about this 
now, leave my native place and live in Tokyo with 
any peace of mind? Sitting face to face with my 
mother, I suddenly remembered the sensei’s warning, 
that I should get my share of my father’s property 
while he was still able to attend to such things. 


MY PARENTS AND I 


97 


“ Well, we don’t usually hear of people dying 
who keep talking about it day after day, so we can 
feel easy. For your father, too, is that kind of man, 
and I think he will live for many years longer. Those 
who are strong and never refer to their death are in 
far greater danger.” 

I listened to my mother in silence. Her idea 
seemed old-fashioned. I did not know upon- what 
she based her opinion, on reasoning or on fad. 


To celebrate my graduation, my parents began 
to talk about inviting our neighbours to a dinner at 
which we should have sekihan. 1 It was the very 
thing that I had been secretly dreading since my 
arrival. I at once objected to it, saying, “Please 
don’t make a fuss about my graduation.” 

1 hated country guests. Their only purpose in 
coming was to drink and eat. They were mostly 
the kind of people who looked forward to some 
event which would make them forgather at some- 
body’s house. Even while I was a child, I hated to 
wait upon them. I imagined my pain would be 
greater, if they were my own guests. But I could 
hardly say to my father and mother that they should 
not make merry with such vulgar people. So I only 


1 Rice boiled with red beans ; in Japan red and white symbolize hap- 
oiness, goodluck etc. 


98 


KOKORO 


repeated that I did not care for such extravagance. 

“ It is not so extravagant, as you think. Your 
graduation is an event which will never occur in 
your life again. It is reasonable to celebrate it. You 
must not refuse,” my mother said, who seemed to 
regard my graduation in the same light as my 
marriage. 

“ Of course we can do without it. But you 
know how people talk,” said my father, who disliked 
other people’s backbiting. It was true that these 
foolish country-people made plenty of ill-natured 
remarks against people who did not do what they 
expected. 

“ The country is different from Tokyo, and very 
troublesome,” he observed again. 

“ Besides it will affect your father’s honour,” 
„ my mother added. I could not carry my point, and 
began to think I would do as they wanted. 

“ Well, I’ve only been saying that you must not 
do such a thing for me. But if you are going to 
invite them because you don’t want any scandal, it 
is a different thing. I should not insist upon what 
is against your interests.” 

“ You trouble me with your reasoning,” he said, 
with a wry face. 

“ O he doesn’t mean that he is going to invite 
people for the sake of his good name, and not for 
you. Even you must understand that we must not 
fail in our duty to the world.” My mother, as a 
woman, always confused the issue at such a time as 


MY PARENTS AND I 


99 


this, though her words were far more numerous 
than my father’s or mine put together. 

“ I am afraid when a man studies 'much, he is 
apt to become argumentative,” was all he said. But 
in this simple sentence, I saw the whole of the com- 
plaint which he always held against me. I did not 
realize how harsh my words had been, but only felt 
his complaint as unreasonable. 

That night, my father was different, and asked 
me what time was most suitable for me to invite 
these guests. I, who was just idling in this old 
house, had no time more convenient than any other. 
This my father knew very well, which showed that 
he was giving way. I, too, did not cling to my pre- 
vious objections, but was obedient to this calm old 
man. We consulted, and a day was fixed for our 
dinner. 

While that day was yet far off, news of an im- 
portant event, the Emperor Meiji’s illness, reached 
our ears. This sad news, which was spread all over 
Japan by the newspapers, blew away like dust the 
celebration dinner which had caused the little rift 
in our household. 

“I think we had better give it up,” said my 
father, who was reading a. newspaper with his spec- 
tacles on. In silence, he seemed to be thinking also 
of his own illness. I remembered the Emperor who 
had come to the university on our recent graduation 
as he had been accustomed to do every year. 


100 


KOKORO 


4 

The old house was too large for the small family 
and it was always hushed. In the midst of that 
quiet, I unpacked my basket-trunk and began to 
read. But why was I so restless? I could study 
far better on the first floor of my lodging in busy 
Tokyo, turning over the pages one after another with 
the sound of the far-away tramcars in my ear, but 
with concentrated interest on what I was doing. 

Leaning against the desk, I often dozed. Some- 
times I took out my pillow and indulged in a regular 
nap. As I woke up, I heard the cicadas, which, 
seeming to have come into my consciousness while 
I was still dreaming, suddenly disturbed the depth 
of my ears with their noisy music. Sometimes they 
made me sad, as I listened to their never changing 
refrain. 

I wrote to my friends, sometimes simple post- 
cards, and sometimes long letters. Some of them 
had remained in Tokyo, but others had returned to 
their distant native place. I received some answers, 
but some of my letters did not even reach those to 
whom they were addressed. Of course I never 
forgot the sensei. I decided to send him a letter close- 
ly written on three sheets of copy paper describing 
my life since my return home. When I put it into 
an envelope, I wondered if he was still in Tokyo. 
When the sensei and his wife went away, a woman 
of about fifty who had her hair cut short and hang- 


MY PARENTS AND I 


101 


ing down used to come and take care of their house. 
Once I asked the sensd who she was, but instead ot 
answering, he countered by asking me what I thought 
of her. I had mistaken her for one of his own rela- 
tions, and he corrected it, saying, “ O I have no re- 
lations.” Indeed he had no intercourse at all with 
what relatives he had in his native place. This 
particular woman was a relation of his wife’s. As 
I went to post my letter, I suddenly remembered 
her figure, with a narrow obi put on comfortably. I 
wondered whether she would have tadt and kind- 
ness enough to send my letter to the sensei’s resort, 
if it arrived after he had gone. Yet I knew quite 
well that there was nothing important in it. Only 
I was lonely, and wanted an answer. But I never 
got it. 

My father did not like to play chess as he had last 
winter. The chess-board was put away in the corner 
of the alcove, covered with dust. Especially since 
the Emperor’s illness he seemed to be plunged in 
deeper thought. He waited for the newspaper every 
day, and when it came, he was the first to read it. 
Then he took the trouble to bring it to me. 

“ Look at this. Today, too, there are minute 
details of the Son of Heaven’s condition.” 

My father always spoke of the Emperor as the 
Son of Heaven. 

“ It is a presumptuous comparison, but my ill- 
ness is the same as that of his august majesty, isn’t 


102 KOKORO 

His face was clouded with deep concern. 
Through my mind, too, flashed an anxiety that my 
father was being exposed to danger every moment. 

“ But it may not be so dangerous for him, for 
even such an insignificant fellow as I can remain 
alive like this.” 

While he thus reassured himself as to his 
strength, he seemed to have a premonition of what 
was about to befall him. 

“ He is really afraid of his illness. He seems 
to have no idea now of living on ten or twenty years 
more,” I said to my mother, who looked perplexed. 

“Suppose you encourage him to play chess 
again.” 

I took down the chess-board from the alcove, 
and dusted it. 

5 

My father gradually began to lose his vigour. 
The old straw hat with the handkerchief hanging 
down from behind gradually fell into disuse. When- 
ever I looked at the hat on the dark sooty shelf, I 
felt more and more pity for its owner. I was an- 
xious about him when he moved about as actively 
as he had before, and urged him to be cautious. But 
when he began to sit still brooding, I felt that after 
all he had been stronger when he had seemed care- 
less. I often talked with my mother about his 
condition. 


MY PARENTS AND I 


103 


“His feelings affecting his body, that is all,” 
said she, who connected my father’s illness with the 
Emperor’s. But I was not convinced. 

“ O no, it is not his spirit, but indeed his body 
that is not well, isn’t it so ? He seems to be getting 
worse.” I replied. I wondered if we should send 
for a reliable dotfor from the far-away town. 

“ You must be unhappy this summer. We can- 
not celebrate it, though you have graduated. Father 
is ill like that, and so is the Son of Heaven. We 
should have invited our guests as soon as you came 
back.” 

I returned home on the fifth (or the sixth per- 
haps) of July. It was about a week after that day 
that my parents began to talk about inviting our 
neighbours. And the day fixed for the dinner was 
more than a week later’ than that. Thanks to the 
country life which was not bound by time, I was, as 
it were, rescued from the disagreeable entertainment. 
But my mother, who never understood me, never 
dreamed that I took it like that. 

When the news of the Emperor’s death reached 
us, my father, with the newspaper in his hands, 
sighed, O dear, the Son of Heaven at last has died. 
I, too But he stopped, and did not say any 
more. 

I went to the neighbouring town to buy some 
thin black material. I covered the ball with it, and 
tied a streamer three inches wide to the top of the 
flagstaff. Then I raised the flag at half mast at the 


104 


KOKORO 


gate. The flag, together with the black streamer, 
hung down in the quiet air. The old gate of our 
house was roofed with straw. Exposed to the wind 
and rain, the colour of the straw had changed to 
light gray, and even its roughness could not escape 
our eyes. I went out of the gate alone, and gazed 
at the black cloth, and the red rising sun on the 
white muslin against the old straw roof. I remem- 
bered what the sensei had asked me once, “ What 
does your house look like ? I wonder if it is much 
different from the houses in my native town ? ” I 
longed to show him this old house in which I was 
born, but at the same time I hesitated to do it. 

, Then I walked into the house alone. I came 
to my desk, and as I read the newspaper, tried to im- 
agine the atmosphere of far-away Tokyo. The centre 
of my imagination was a picture of the greatest city 
in Japan which had just lost its father and was moving 
in a cloud of black. In the midst of the city, bustl- 
ing and uneasy yet obliged to activity even though 
in mourning, I saw the sensei’s house, as if it repre- 
sented the only light in that dark city, I did not 
know that this light was also caught up in a noise- 
less whirlpool. I had not the faintest idea that this 
light, too, was destined to go out in the near future. 

I took up my pen, to write to him about this 
event. But scarcely had I written ten lines when I 
gave it up. I tore the paper into pieces and threw 
them into a wastepaper basket. (Because I thought 
it useless to write such things to him, besides my 


MY PARENTS AND I 


105 


experience told me that he might never answer me.) 
I was lonely. So I wrote letters, and longed for 
their answers. 

6 

I heard from a friend of mine in the middle of 
August. He informed me that there was a position 
vacant as a teacher in a country middle school. He 
was one of those who, urged by economic needs, was 
looking for such a position. This vacancy indeed 
he had secured for himself, but finding a better one 
in the meantime in another prefecture, he took the 
trouble to advise me to pick up the grain he had 
dropped. I declined at once, adding that he had 
better give it to those who were striving after such 
positions. 

After I had posted my answer, I told my parents 
of it. They both agreed. 

“I suppose you can find a better one. You 
should not go to such a school as that.” 

Their sayings made me feel that they cherished 
a sentimental hope for my future. My careless 
parents seemed to be looking forward to a position 
and salary entirely unsuited to the inexperience of 
one who had just graduated. 

“ But it is very difficult nowadays to find such 
a position as you expedr. In particular my brother 
and I are different in our studies and in the ages in 
which we were born ; so I hope you won’t expecft 
me to do as he did.” 


106 


KOKORO 


“ But you have graduated, so you should become 
independent at least. If people ask me, ‘ What is 
your second son doing, after his graduation from 
the university ? ’ what shall I say 1 I shall feel quite 
ashamed if I can’t say anything about you.” 

He frowned. His ideas could not be freed from 
his native place where he had lived from birth. He, 
who had been asked by some neighbours how much 
could one earn when one had graduated from the 
university, or if one could get about a hundred yen, 
wanted to get me settled so that he should never be 
ashamed of his son. To my parents, I, thinking in 
terms of the spacious Tokyo, was like nothing so 
much as a queer creature always walking on its head. 
Indeed, I myself, too, sometimes felt like that. 1 
was silent before my parents, who were so far sepa- 
rated from me that it was impossible to share my 
ideas with them. 

“ You had better ask that man you are always 
speaking of about such a problem as this,” my mother 
said, who could not think of the sensei otherwise. 
But that very sensei was the one who had advised 
me to get my share of my property while my father 
was able to attend to such matters. He was not the 
kind of man who would try to find a position for me. 

“ What is he doing ? ” he asked. 

“ Oh, nothing,” I replied. 

I thought I had told my parents long ago that 
the sensei had no profession, and my father was sure 
to remember that. 


MY PARENTS AND I 


107 


“ Not doing .anything, why ? If he is a man 
worthy of your admiration, he must be doing some- 
thing,” he said, intending to teach me indirectly. In 
his opinion, all able men in the world were work- 
ing ; and he seemed to have concluded that the 
sensei was idle because he was good-for-nothing. 

“ Even a man like me is not always idle, though 
I don’t get any salary,” he said, but I was still silent. 

“ If he is such a splendid man as you say, he 
will be sure to find some position for you. Did you 
ask him ? ” my mother said. 

“ No, not yet,” I replied. 

“ You are hopeless. Why haven’t you asked 
him ? You had better write to him.” 

“ Yes, I will.” 

I gave a vague answer, and left them. 

7 

My father was apparently afraid of his illness. 
But he was not the kind of man that annoys the 
dodtors with tiresome questions whenever they ap- 
pear. The dodtor, too, hesitated to tell him any- 
thing about himself. 

He seemed to be imagining what would come 
after his death. At least the pidture of his house 
after he left it seemed to be occupying his mind. 

“ It is doubtful whether it is a good thing to 
make our children study. When they finally finish 
at school, they never come back. It is as if we sent 


KOKORO 


108 

our children to school to separate them from us.” 

As the result of his learning, my brother lived 
far from home. Unfortunately I had also had the 
same kind of education ; consequently, I, too, had 
made up my mind to live in Tokyo. My father, 
having brought up such sons, complained not un- 
reasonably about it. He must have felt really iso- 
lated as he drew a picture of my mother who would 
probably be left alone in the old country house. 

He firmly believed that his own house was an 
establishment which could never be removed ; and 
it never seemed to occur to him that my mother 
could live anywhere but in this selfsame house. It 
made him extremely uneasy to leave this solitary 
woman in the empty house, yet he continued to urge 
me to find a good position in Tokyo. This con- 
tradiction seemed ridiculous, but at the same time 
I was glad to be able to return to Tokyo thanks to 
this idea of his. 

I had to practise a little deception, making my 
parents believe that I was doing my best to find a 
position. I wrote to the sensei, describing the minute 
circumstances of my home, and I asked him if he 
could find something for me to do, adding that any- 
thing would do, if it were within my ability. I 
wrote this, thinking that he would never take it 
seriously, or if he did, the unsociable sensei could 
not do anything for me. But I thought he would 
surely answer me. 

Before I sealed it, I said to my mother, “ I wrote 


MY PARENTS AND I 


1 <# 


to the sensei, as you suggested. Here is the letter. 
Will you read it ? ” My mother, as I expedted, did 
not read it. 

“ O have you done it ? Then post it as soon 
as you can. You should have written long ago, and 
not waited for me to remind you.” 

To my mother I still seemed a boy. I, too, 
really felt as if I were very young and inexperienced. 

“ But I shall never be able to succeed by cor- 
respondence alone. Anyway, it will not be until 1 
go up to Tokyo in September that I shall be settled.” 

“ Perhaps. But a very good position might ap- 
pear suddenly. No one is sure about that. So it 
is best to begin to try and find it as early as possible.” 

“ Yes, at any rate, he will surely answer me. 
Then I will tell you.” I believed he would be care- 
ful about a thing like this. I waited for his letter. 
But contrary to my expectation, a week passed with- 
out bringing me any news from him. 

“ Perhaps he has gone away to a summer resort.” 

I had to utter such explanatory words before 
my mother. These words were not only intended 
for my mother, but for myself. I felt uneasy when 
I could not find any explanation for his behaviour 
in some way. 

Sometimes I forgot my father’s illness. I thought 
I should go up to town earlier than I had planned. 
Sometimes my father, too, forgot his own condition 
himself. He was anxious about the future, but he 
did not take steps to provide for it at all. So I could 


110 


KOKORO 


not seize any opportunity of following the sensei’s 
advice and asking him about sharing his property. 

8 

Finally, in the beginning of September, I decid- 
ed to go to Tokyo again. I asked my father if he 
would continue my allowance for a short time as he 
had done in the past. 

“ I could never get a position such as you want 
by spending my days here.” 

I spoke to him as if I was going to Tokyo to 
find a place which would satisfy his expectations. 

“ Of course I ask your support only for a short 
while, till I am settled,” I added. I felt that that 
position would never be found. But my father, 
who was ignorant of the state of affairs, adhered to 
his belief that it would. 

“ O yes, it will be only a short time, so I shall 
manage somehow to supply you. But you must not 
expedt it indefinitely. You must become indepen- 
dent as soon as you get some position. Really, you 
ought never to depend on others from the moment 
of your graduation. Young people nowadays only 
know how to spend money, but they never seem to 
think how to earn it.” 

He gave me many other kinds of admonition, 
among which there were words like this, “ Formerly 
the parents were fed by the children, but now they 
are eaten by the children.” I listened in silence. 


MY PARENTS AND I 


111 


His advice being over, I was about to leave my 
seat quietly, when be asked me when I was going. 
To me the sooner the better. 

“ Ask your mother to look up the almanac.” 

“ Yes.” 

I was then quite docile before my father. I 
tried to leave my native place with as little opposi- 
tion to him as possible. My father detained me. 

“ After you go away, my house will become 
lonely again. Anyway, it is only your mother and 
I who will remain here. We shall not feel it if I am 
quite well, but as it is, no one knows when and in 
what manner the danger may come.” 

I consoled my father as best I could, and re- 
turned to my desk. I sat among the books scattered 
about, and thought over and over again of my help- 
less father and his words, when I heard the cicadas 
once more. This refrain was made by the tsuku- 
tsulat'boshi 1 and was quite different from what I had 
heard a few days before. At home in summer I 
often became strangely sad when I sat still amidst 
the cicadas which were buzzing as if boiling in the 
heat. This sorrow seemed to penetrate into the 
depth of my heart with their violent music. When 
I felt like that, I always sat still, and looked into my 
inward being. 

That melancholy mood of mine had gradually 
changed its tone since I returned home. As the 


1 A kind of cicada which begins singing in the end of summer* 



112 


KOKORO 


aburazemi 1 had gone, and the tsuku-tsuku-boshi had 
come, what was destined to happen to those who 
were around me seemed to reveal itself little by little 
in the huge mutable world. Revolving in my mind 
my father’s words and the image of his lonely figure 
rising over and over again, I thought of the sensei 
who had not answered my letter. He and my father, 
because of the entirely opposite impressions they 
made upon me, came naturally to my mind at the 
same moment, by way of comparison and association. 

I knew my father almost perfectly. If I were 
to be separated from him, all I felt about it was the 
regret and sorrow of a son parting from his father 
for ever. But I knew very little about the sensei. I 
had had no opportunity of hearing about his past 
which he had promised to impart to me. In a word, 
the sensei was an obscure existence for me. I felt I 
could never be satisfied unless I got out of that 
obscurity and reached the stage of perfect under- 
standing. It was the greatest pain for me to give 
up our friendship. I asked my mother to look up 
the almanac, and fixed the day for my departure. 

9 

When I was about to leave home (I am sure it 
was two or three days before my intended depar- 
ture), my father suddenly fainted for the second 


1 A kind of cicada which sings in the heat of summer. 


MY PARENTS AND I 113 

time. I was fastening my basket-trunk in which my 
clothes and books had been packed. My father had 
just gone to take a bath, and my mother, who went 
into the bathroom to wash his back, called me in a 
loud voice ; I saw her supporting him by his bare 
back. But when we brought him back into the 
parlour, he said he was all right. It was at nine that 
I took a hasty supper ; until then I had been sitting 
close to his pillow, cooling his forehead with a wet 
towel by way of precaution. 

The next day, he felt better than we had ex- 
pected, and insisted upon doing everything for 
himself. 

“ O I am all right now,” he repeated what he 
had said to me when he had fainted last winter. At 
that time it had been all right as he had said. So 
I felt he might repeat that state again. But the 
doctor only remarked that we could never be too 
careful. He did not explain his condition clearly 
even though I asked him. My anxiety made me 
unwilling to start for Tokyo on the fixed day. 

“ Shall I put it off, till we are sure that he is all 
right ? ” I asked my mother. 

“ Yes, do,” she begged. 

She was more disquieted and anxious about him 
now than was necessary, though she had been in- 
different to his condition while she saw him going 
into the garden or the back yard in high spirits. 

“ Didn’t you decide to go up to Tokyo today ? ” 
my father asked. 


114 


KOKORO 


“ Yes, but I put it off for a few days,” I replied. 

“ For my sake ? ” he asked in reply. 

I hesitated for a moment. If I said yes, it would 
have implied that he was seriously ill. I did not 
want to make him nervous. But he seemed to have 
seen through my mind. 

“ O I am sorry,” he said, and looked toward 
the garden. 

I came to my room, and looked at the basket- 
trunk there. It was bound fast, so that it could be 
born out at any time. I absent-mindedly stood in 
front of it, and wondered if I should unpack it again. 

In that state of restlessness, in which we 
seemed to be sitting down but trying to stand up 
again, three or four days passed. Then my father 
fainted again. The doctor ordered him to keep to 
his bed with the utmost quiet. 

“ What shall we do ? ” my mother said, in a 
very low voice so that it might not reach my father’s 
ears. Her expression was extremely helpless. I got 
ready to wire my brother and sister. But my father 
in bed had little pain. When I saw him talking, 
he looked quite the same as when he had caught 
cold. Besides he had more appetite than usual, and 
he would not easily obey our warnings. 

“ Ah, I am going to die soon, so I must eat 
something delicious first.” 

To me his words sounded both comic and 
tragic ; for he did not live in the town where we 
could get plenty of dainties. In the evening, he 


MY PARENTS AND I 115 

asked my mother to bake some dried rice-cakes and 
he munched them. 

“I wonder why he is so ravenous. Perhaps 
there is some strength in his bone.” My mother 
put her hope in the very thing which should have 
discouraged us. And yet she uttered the old-fashion- 
ed word ravenous that was used only of sick people 
hungry for everything. 

When my uncle came to see him, my father 
did not wish him to go, chiefly because of his loneli- 
ness, but partly because he wished to complain about 
our not allowing him to eat as much as he liked. 

10 

For more than a week he remained about the 
same. During those days I wrote a long letter to 
my brother in Kyushu, asking my mother to write 
to my sister. I felt that these letters might be the 
last ones describing my father’s condition. I added 
that they should come as soon as they received my 
telegrams, which I intended to send them in case of 
emergency. 

My brother’s profession made him very busy. 
My sister was expecting a baby. Neither of them, 
therefore, was at liberty to come home unless our 
father were in real danger. Yet I should be sorry 
if when they finally managed to come it were too 
late. The responsibility, which rested solely on me, 
weighed heavily upon my mind, as 1 did not know 



116 


KOKORO 




fl 



If 


the right time to wire them. 

“ Even I can’t tell exadtly. But you must be 
prepared at any moment,” said the doctor who came 
from the town where there was a railway station. 
1 consulted my mother, and we decided to engage 
a nurse from the hospital in the town. My father, 
seeing a woman in white salute him near his pillow, 
looked rather queer. 

My father had long realized that he had been 
suffering from a fatal disease. Yet he was not 
aware of the approach of death itself. 

“ I shall visit Tokyo again when I have recovered. 
We don’t know when we are going to die. So it is 
best to do what we want while we are still alive.” My 
mother, not knowing what to say to him, chimed in, 
“ When you go to Tokyo, please take me with you.” 

But sometimes he made the appeal of extreme 
loneliness, saying, “ If I die, please take good care 
of your mother.” 

I had a sort of remembrance of these words, 
“ if I die.” It was on the evening of my graduation 
that the sensei had repeated them to his wife over 
and over again. I remembered the sensei’s smiling 
face and his wife’s figure, covering her ears with her 
hands, “ What an ominous joke ! ” At that time, 
“ If I die ” was simply a supposition. But what I 
heard now was a fadt which was threatening us every 
moment. I could not imitate her reply to the sensei , 
but I had to divert him, even though it was only 
with idle words. 


MY PARENTS AND I 


117 


“ Don’t talk like that. You are going to visit 
Tokyo when you get well and strong, and Mother is 
going with you. You will certainly be astonished, 
because everything is so changed in Tokyo. There 
are many new tram-ways, and because of this, the 
streets are improving very much. Besides, the city- 
reorganization has been begun. We can almost 
say there is not a minute in the twenty-four hours 
when Tokyo is not astir.” 

Not knowing how to divert him, I told him 
even unnecessary things. But my father listened 
contentedly. 

As the natural outcome of his illness, our house 
was thronged with people. The relatives in the 
neighbourhood, at the rate of one in two days, came 
to inquire after the patient. Among them were 
those who lived comparatively far and did not usu- 
ally visit us often. “ I think he is all right. He is 
better than I expedted. First of all, he can talk 
freely, and his face has not become thinner at all,” 
said one of those visitors when he left us. The 
household, almost too quiet and hushed weeks be- 
fore when I returned, was becoming more active. 

My father’s illness was the only thing that stood 
still, or if it moved it was only toward a worse state. 
I consulted my mother and uncle, and wired my 
brother and sister at last. My brother wired that 
he would come at once. My sister’s husband, too, 
informed us that he was coming. He had written 
to us that he was advising my sister, who had mis- 


1X8 


KOKORO 


carried last time, to take good care so as not to re- 
peat it again; he might be coming to see my father 
in place of her. 


Amidst this restlessness, I had time to sit quiet- 
ly at my desk. Sometimes I had even the leisure to 
open a book and read about ten pages without being 
interrupted. My basket-trunk, which had been 
bound fast, had been unpacked, I knew not when. 
I took various things out, as I needed them. I 
thought of my programme for the summer which I 
had made just before I left Tokyo. What I had 
actually done did not amount even to one third of 
what I had intended. I repeatedly suffered this kind 
of disappointment over and over again. But I had 
never spent such a fruitless summer as this. I tried 
to think that life was always like this, yet I was 
crushed by unpleasant feelings. 

As I sat in this disappointment, I considered 
my father’s illness. I wondered about the future 
when he would leave us. At the same time, I 
thought of the sensei. At the two opposite ends of 
my discomfort, I saw the figures of those two who 
were entirely different in social position, education, 
and character. 

One day when I had left my father’s bedroom 
and was sitting among my scattered books, crossing 
my arms, my mother appeared, and said, “ You had 


MY PARENTS AND I 


119 


better take a nice little nap sometimes. You must 
be very tired.” She did not know how I felt. I, too, 
was not so childish as to expedt her to understand 
me. 1 simply thanked her. But she remained stand- 
ing on the threshold of my room. 

“ How is Father ? ” I asked. 

“ He is fast asleep now,” she replied. 

Suddenly she came into my room, sat down 
beside me, and asked, “ Have you not heard from 
the sensei ? ” 

She firmly believed what I had said before. At 
that time, I assured her that he would answer, 
though I had no expectation at all of receiving the 
kind of letter which would satisfy my parents. It 
was as if I had deceived her, when everything had 
been clear to me. 

“ Write to him again, will you? ” she said. 

I could not complain of the trouble of writing 
useless letters if that would comfort her. But it 
was painful to me to press the sensei with such a 
matter as this. I was far more afraid of being des- 
pised by him than of displeasing my mother or even 
my father. I even had a secret fear that he had not 
answered because of this contempt. 

“ It is easy for me to write to him, but it won’t 
do to rely on letters alone, especially about a thing 
like this. I should go up to Tokyo, and ask him 
and others in person.” 

“ But with your father like this, how can you 
go to Tokyo ? We don’t know when you can.” 


120 


KOKORQ 



“ Of course, I shall not go. 1 will stay here, 
as long as his condition is uncertain.” 

“Yes, surely. How could we go selfishly to 
Tokyo, leaving your father seriously ill ? ” 

At first 1 pitied my mother who was quite igno- 
rant about my affairs. But I could not understand 
why she wanted to talk about such a thing in this 
upset. I wondered if there was still some room left 
in her mind to think of other things forgetting the 
sick husband before her, just as I had leisure to sit 
quietly and read in spite of his illness. 

But then she began, “ To tell you the truth, 1 
think how comforted your father will be if you are 
settled while he is still alive. I am afraid it will be 
too late, judging from his condition now. Yet he 
still talks well, and understands well, so I want you 
to set his heart at ease while he is still like this. 
Won’t you be a good son to him ? ” 

Poor me! I could not become an obedient 
son, and I did not write a word to the sensei-. 

12 

When my brother came back, my father was 
reading a newspaper in his bed. He used to look 
at the newspapers before anything else. After he 
kept to his bed, he wanted more and more to miti- 
gate his boredom by those newspapers. My mother, 
instead of stopping him, tried to leave him alone as 
much as possible. 



MY PARENTS AND I 


121 


“ I am very glad you are well enough to read 
the newspaper. I expecfted you were worse, but you 
look very well.” 

So saying, my brother talked with my father. 
But his too lively tone seemed out of keeping with 
the real situation. But when he and I were alone, 
my brother was more serious and sad. 

“ You should not let him read a newspaper.” 

“ Yes, I quite agree with you. But he insists 
upon it, and we cannot stop him.” 

He listened to my apology in silence, then said, 
“ But can he understand it well ? ” He seemed to 
have perceived that my father’s understanding had 
become duller through his illness. 

“ O yes, to be sure. Just a little while ago, I 
sat close to his pillow and talked with him about 
twenty minutes, but I found nothing out of time 
about him. To judge by his condition, I think he 
may live for many days,” said my sister’s husband, 
who arrived almost at the same time as my brother. 
His opinion was far more optimistic than ours. My 
father was asking him many things about my sister, 
saying, “ She had much better not be disturbed by 
an unnecessary journey. If she takes a risk, and 
comes to see me, I shall feel very uneasy.” Again 
he said, “ It is a long time since I saw her. So if I 
become well again, I shall go to see her myself, to 
see the baby. It is not necessary for her to come 
here.” 

My father was the first to read of General No- 


122 


KOKORO 


gi’s death, and said, “ Good heavens, good heavens ! ” 
We, who did not know anything about this event, 
were surprised at this sudden exclamation. 

“ I felt as if a dagger were pointed at my heart 
when I heard that exclamation. I thought that he 
had finally lost his reason,” was what my brother 
said afterward. “ Yes, I was really frightened, too,” 
my brother-in-law agreed. 

Indeed in everyday’s newspaper in those days 
there were plenty of things about which country- 
people like us were eager to hear. I sat close to my 
father’s pillow, and read it carefully. When I had 
no time to read it in his room, I secretly took it 
into my room and read it all. I could not forget 
for a long time General Nogi’s figure in his uniform 



and his wife’s dressed like an ancient court-lady. 

When the sad wind was blowing into our 
corner of the country, shaking the half-sleeping 
trees and grass, I received a sudden telegram from 
the sensei. In the village where a dog would bark 
at a man in foreign clothes, even a telegram was a 
great event. My mother, who had received it, was 
very impressed and took the trouble to call me into 
a place where nobody was present. 

“ What is this about ? ” She stood beside me, 
waiting for me to open it. The telegram asked me 
to go to Tokyo to see him. I mused with my head 
bent on one side. 

“ I am sure it is about your position,” was my 
mother’s opinion. 


MY PARENTS AND I 


123 


I thought perhaps it might be so. But it hardly 
seemed possible. At any rate, it was impossible for 
me, having asked my brother and brother-in-law to 
come, to leave my sick father and go to Tokyo. I 
consulted my mother, and decided to wire him that 
I could not go. In a sentence as simple as possible, 
I wrote that my father was seriously ill. But finding 
this unsatisfactory, I added another sentence stating 
that I would explain everything in a letter, and on 
the same day, I posted the letter describing my 
circumstances minutely. My mother, who firmly 
believed that it was about nothing but my position, 
seemed deeply distressed, and said, “ Oh, we are 
unlucky ! ” 

13 

The letter I wrote was a fairly long one. Both 
my mother and I believed that he would surely an- 
swer this letter. Then two days after I had written 
to him, another telegram came to me, simply stating 
that he could manage without me. I showed it to 
my mother. 

“ Perhaps he is intending to write to you about 
it.” 

My mother seemed to have no other thought 
than that he was endeavouring to find a position for 
me. Perhaps she was right, but I could not believe it, 
judging from his everyday life. It seemed utterly 
impossible to think that the sensei could find me a 
position. 


124 


KOKORO 



“ At any rate, I am sure he has not received my 
letter yet. So he must have wired this before see- 
ing it,” I said to my mother. My mother, deep in 
thought, agreed with me gravely, well knowing that 
that fad: was of no use in understanding the sensei. 

On that day the doctor in charge was to come 
and see my father with the head physician of the 
hospital in the town. So neither my mother nor I 
had the opportunity to talk about anything else. 
The two doctors held a consultation over the pa- 
tient, and returned after finishing a rectal injection. 

Since my father was ordered rest, he was obliged 
to ask others to do everything for him. Fastidious 
as he was, he hated this kind of life at first, but as 
his limbs were not at his command, he was forced 
to remain quietly in bed. But as the days went on, 
because of his understanding having become duller 
through his illness or through some other reason, 
he began to perform various natural functions un- 
consciously. Sometimes the bed-clothes and sheets 
were stained, but he did not seem to mind, though 
it disturbed us. Owing to his illness, the quantity 
of his urine became very small, which caused the 
doctor some anxiety. His appetite gradually became 
poorer. Sometimes he wanted something to eat, but 
only his tongue wanted it; his stomach could accept 
very little. He had no more energy to take up the 
newspaper that he had loved to read, his spectacles 
beside his pillow always remained in their black case. 
When Saku San, with whom my father had been 




MY PARENTS AND I 125 

quite intimate since childhood, and who lived about 
two miles away, came to see him, my father, casting 
glassy eyes toward him, said, “ O you, Saku San,” 
and, “ It is very kind of you to come, Saku San. 
You look very well, and I envy you. I am dying.” 

“ O no, you are more fortunate than I. Your 
two sons have graduated from the university. It is 
nothing to be ill for a little. Look at me. My wife 
died, and I have no child. The only thing about 
me is that I am living. And though I am well, I 
have no comfort, nor pleasure. Don’t you see ? ” 

It was two or three days after Saku San’s visit 
that he had the recital injection. He was glad to 
feel more comfortable after that. He seemed to 
have gained some hope for his life, and looked mer- 
rier. My mother, encouraged by his condition, or 
wanting to cheer him up, told him about the sensei’s 
telegram, as if I had found a position that would 
satisfy his hope in Tokyo. I, who happened to be 
there, felt some itch in my conscience but listened 
to her in silence, as I could not interrupt her. My 
father looked happy. 

“O I am glad to hear that,” my sister’s hus- 
band said. 

“ Don’t you know what kind of position it is 
yet ? ” my brother asked. 

I lost the courage to deny it then. I deliberately 
left the room, mumbling a vague answer which even 
I could not make out. 


126 


KOKORO 


My father’s illness seemed to have reached the 
stage when only the last blow was wanting to finish 
him, and its advance was only arrested for a while. 
Every night, all the household went to bed, threat- 
ened by the expectation that the sentence of Destiny 
might come upon him during the night. 

My father had not enough pain in any part of 
his body to make us unhappy. From that stand- 
point, to nurse him was quite an easy task. For 
caution’s sake, one of us sat beside his bed every 
night in turn, but the rest could retire at the ordi- 
nary bed-time. One night when I could not sleep, 
I seemed to hear my father groan. I got out of my 
bed in that midnight, and went to his bedside to 
!|: make sure. That night it was my mother’s turn to 

| keep vigil. But with her bent arm as her pillow, 

she was fast asleep beside him. My father, too, like 
a man softly lulled into a deep sleep, was quiet. I 
walked out of the room on tiptoe, and returned to 
my bed. 

I slept under the same mosquito-curtain as my 
brother. My sister’s husband alone, because of his 
being treated as a guest, rested in a room far apart 
from ours. 

“Iam sorry that Seki San has to stay so many 
days.” 

Seki was my brother-in-law’s surname. 

“ But probably he is not too busy to stay a 


MY PARENTS AND I 


127 


little while with us. But it is you who must be 
disturbed. It is so many days since you returned.” 

“ But I cannot help that. This is different from 
anything else, you know.” 

Lying beside him, I talked with him like this. 
Both my brother and I felt that my father could 
never recover again. The thought, “ He is going to 
die sooner or later,” lay in our minds. We, as sons, 
were, as it were, waiting for our father’s death. But 
we hesitated to express that in words. Yet we per- 
fectly understood each other’s thought. 

“ Father seems to be expecting to get well 
again,” my brother said to me. 

In fact, there was something about him which 
made us feel like that. When our neighbours came 
to inquire after him, he insisted on seeing them. 
Whenever he met them, he expressed his regret that 
he could not invite them to our dinner celebrating 
my graduation, and sometimes he added that he 
would surely invite them when he became well 
again. 

“ Oh, I am glad to hear that you have escaped 
that celebration dinner. When mine took place, I 
was quite tortured,” said my brother, and reminded 
me of that past. I smiled bitterly, remembering the 
unpleasant scene resulting from too much alcoholic 
drink. I saw again my father’s embarrassing manner, 
as he walked about the room pressing the guests to 
eat and drink. 

We had not been intimate as brothers. When 


128 


KOKORO 


we were little, we often quarrelled, and being younger, 
it was always my part to cry. Our special subjects 
in the university grew solely out of the difference in 
our characters. After entering the university, and 
especially since I knew the sensei, when I considered 
my brother thence, I had always thought him brutish. 
I had not seen him for a long time, and he lived 
quite far away, so speaking from both time and dis- 
tance, he was always not near to me. But when we 
met after a long time, the fraternal tenderness sprang 
up naturally from I knew not where. The greatest 
cause for it was that we were facing one of the 
greatest events of our lives. My brother and I shook 
hands close to the pillow of one, who was our father, 
and who was dying. 

“ What are you going to do ? ” he asked. I 
questioned him in return about a different matter. 

“ I wonder how Father has been managing his 
property.” 

“ O I don’t know. Father doesn’t say anything 
about it yet. You call it property, but, as for money, 
it is not much, I think.” 

My mother, in her turn, was anxious about the 
sensei’s letter. 

“ Haven’t you received his letter ? ” she kept 
asking me. 

15 

“ Who on earth is the sensei ? ” my brother asked. 


MY PARENTS AND 1 129 

“ Haven’t I told you about him just recently ? ” 
I asked, displeased at my brother’s forgetting so 
easily about the affairs of others, when he himself 
had taken the trouble to ask for the information. 

“ O yes, I think I remember.” 

He said he could not understand after all. In 
my opinion, there was no necessity to try to make 
him understand the sensei, but I was mortified. I 
felt that this was a glimmer of his old nature. 

My brother’s opinion was that since I admired 
the sensei , he must be a man quite well known. He 
seemed to think that the sensei might be at least one 
of the professors in the university. Of what use 
was a man who had no name, who was not doing 
anything ? In this re sped:, his idea was the same as 
my father’s. But while the latter judged rashly that 
the sensei was doing nothing because he had no 
ability, the former suggested that those who wasted 
their time in spite of their ability must be worthless. 
He said, “ I don’t like an egoist. Because it is sel- 
fish to live on without doing something definite. 
We ought to work to the best of our ability.” 

I wanted to ask him if he knew the meaning 
of the word egoist that he seemed to use so freely. 
Then he added, “ Anyhow, I am very glad he can 
find a position for you. It seems to make Father 
happy, doesn’t it ? ” 

As long as I received no letter of explanation 
from the sensei , I could not believe this, but I lacked 
the courage to express any doubt. Now that my 


130 


KOKOR.O 


mother, from her hasty conclusion, had announced 
it to all the members of my family, I could not asto- 
nish them by my sudden denial. Even though I had 
not been urged by my mother, I would have waited 
for the sensei’s letter. I prayed that the letter might 
contain something about my position as everybody 
else expected it. In front of my father who was 
dying, of my mother who was eager to ease his 
mind, of my brother who did not regard one as a 
human being unless one worked, of my sister’s hus- 
band and my uncles and aunts, I had to worry my- 
self about the thing that I did not at all care about. 

When my father felt sick, and I saw that yellow 
liquid coming out of his mouth, I remembered the 
danger against which the sensei and his wife had 
warned me once. Looking at my mother, who said, 
“ It is natural that his stomach should be upset. 
He has been in bed such a long time,” tears stood 
in my eyes at her ignorance. 

When my brother and I met in the sitting-room, 
he said, “ Did you hear that ? ” He meant whether 
I had heard what the doctor had said when he left. 
I knew this perfectly well, though I received no 
explanation. 

“ Don’t you want to leave Tokyo and take care 
of our household i ” he said, turning his face toward 
me. I was silent. “ Mother, when left alone, can 
do nothing, can she ? ” he said again. He did not 
seem to think that there was anything to be pitied 
about my growing old in these rural surroundings 



MY PARENTS AND I 


131 



with only the smell of the earth in my nostrils. 

“ You can read as much as you want in th$ 
country. Besides, there is no necessity for you to 
work. Wouldn’t it suit you ? ” 

“ Properly speaking, it is you who should come 
back,” I replied. 

“ How can I do such a thing ? ” he rejected it 
at once. His mind was filled with the desire to do 
something in the world. 

“ If you don’t like it, we must ask Uncle to help 
us. But I think either you or I must take care of 
Mother.” 

“ It is very doubtful whether Mother would 
leave this house or not.” 

Thus we, two brothers, talked about what was 
to be done after our father’s death, even while he 
was still alive. 

16 

My father began to talk in delirium. 

“ I am very sorry, General Nogi. Indeed, I am 
ashamed of myself. Yes, I will go after you at once.” 

Often he spoke like this. My mother was 
horrified, and wanted us all to sit beside him as 
much as possible. My father, who expressed his 
loneliness when he was himself, seemed to like it 
too. Especially when he looked around the room 
and could not find my mother’s figure, he was sure 
to ask, “ Where is Omitsu ? ” Even when he did 
not say so, his eyes spoke that for him. I often 


132 


KOKORO 


went out of the room to fetch my mother. When 
she left her work and came to him, saying, “ Is 
there something you want me to do ? ” he sometimes 
said nothing, but only gazed at her. But sometimes 
he said something quite unexpected to her. Or, he 
surprised us by saying something very tender to her, 
“ Omitsu, you have taken care of me so kindly.” 
My mother’s eyes always swam with tears at those 
words of his, and she always remembered my father 
when he was young and strong and compared him 
with this feeble, gentle, old man. “ Now he talks 
like this, but before he was very hard and cruel.” 
She added that he had once struck her on the back 
with a broom. My brother and I, who had heard 
that story over and over again, listened to her in 
quite a different mood, as if she were telling us a 
reminiscence of a dead man. 

My father, looking at the black shadow of death 
before him, had not referred to his will yet. 

“ Ought we not to ask him while he can still 
understand ? ” my brother said, looking at me. 

“ I wonder,” I replied. I thought that it might 
not be good for my father to be asked such a thing 
if he did not volunteer the information. We, un- 
decided, finally consulted our uncle. He, too, bent 
his head thoughtfully. 

“ But if there is anything that he wants to say 
to us, it would be a pity for him to die with it still 
on his mind. But I wonder whether we should not 
ask him first.” 


MY PARENTS AND I 


133 


We did not reach any decision about this mat- 
ter. Then he sank into a comatose state. My 
mother, who, as usual, was ignorant of his condi- 
tion, was glad, mistaking it for an ordinary sleep. 
She said, “ What a relief it is for us that he can sleep 
quietly like this.” 

Sometimes my father opened his eyes and sud- 
denly asked us what So-and-so was doing. The 
name of the one that he inquired about was always 
one of those who had just been sitting near him. 
It seemed that the dark spot and the light one grew 
in his consciousness, and the latter, like a white 
thread stitching together the dusk, only continued 
its existence at some interval. It was natural for 
my mother to mistake that unconsciousness for an 
ordinary sleep. 

Then his tongue gradually lost its freedom. 
Though he sometimes tried to say something, it was 
often that we could not reach any conclusion, owing 
to the obscure ending of what he said. Yet, when 
he opened his mouth, his voice was so strong that 
no one could believe it belonged to a man who was 
so seriously ill. As for us, we had to speak in a far 
louder voice than usual, and with our mouths as 
close to his ears as possible. 

“ Is it comfortable to cool your head ? ” 

“Yes.” 

With the aid of the nurse, I changed the water- 
pillow, and put an ice-bag full of newly-chopped 
ice on his head. As I was gently pressing the sharp 


134 


KOKORO 


pieces of ice flat against his bald forehead, my 
brother, coming from the corridor, silently handed 
me a letter. I took it with my unoccupied left hand 
and began at once to wonder. 

It was much heavier than the usual letter. It 
was not even in an ordinary envelope. It was too 
long for that. It was covered with a sheet of Japa- 
nese paper, and sealed carefully with paste. As I 
received it from my brother, I at once marked that 
it was registered. 1 found the sensei’s name in care- 
fully written characters on the back. Occupied as 
I was, I could not open it, and thrust it into my 
bosom. 



On that day, my father’s condition seemed to 
be exceedingly bad. When I left him for a moment, 
my brother, whom I passed in the corridor, said 
in a tone like a guard’s, “ Where are you going ? ” 
and warned me to sit beside my father as much as 
possible, for his condition was quite critical. I 
thought that too. So I returned to his room with- 
out attempting to read the letter in my bosom. 
My father, opening his eyes, asked my mother the 
names of those who sat there. When she told 
him one by one, he nodded at each name. When 
he did not nod, she, in a louder voice, repeated, 
“ This is So-and-so. Do you understand ? ” 

“ I have been troubling you all so much,” he 


MY PARENTS AND I 


135 


said. Then he fell into a stupor. For a while, 
those who sat around his bed gazed at him in si- 
lence. Then one got up and went into the next 
room. Still another left. Finally, as the third, I 
went out and entered my room. I wanted to open 
the letter which I had thrust into my bosom a little 
while before. I could do that easily enough even 
beside my father’s bed. But it was so bulky that it 
was impossible to read it through there. I stole some 
minutes which I hoped to be able to devote to this 
task. 

I tore the strong-fibred wrapping paper, almost 
scratching at it. Then appeared something like a 
manuscript finely written on lined paper folded in 
four for the convenience of packing. I turned back 
these sheets of foreign paper to make them even, 
so that I could read more easily. 

I was surprised at this great quantity of paper 
and ink, and wondered what they were going to 
convey to me. At the same time, I felt anxious 
about my father. I was sure that something would 
happen to him before 1 finished this letter, or at 
least I was certain to be called by my brother, my 
mother, or my uncle. I could not read the letter 
with a calm mind. Quite restless, I only read the 
first page, which was as follows. 

“ When you asked me to explain my past, I had 
not courage enough to satisfy you. But now, I be- 
lieve I have won the freedom to explain it clearly 
to you. But that freedom is but a worldly one, 


136 


KOKORO 


which will be lost if 1 wait for your return to Tokyo. 
So, if I do not avail myself of this freedom while I 



can, 1 shall lose for ever the opportunity to pour my 
past into your ears as indirect experience for you. If 
so, my words, so firmly promised to you, will become 
entirely a lie. I made up my mind to use my pen, 
instead of my mouth, because I could not help it.” 

Reading thus much, I could clearly understand 
the reason why he had written such a long letter. 
From the beginning, I believed that he would never 
write to me about the way of earning my daily bread. 
But why was the sensei, who did not like to take 
up his pen, persuaded to reveal his past in such a 
long letter ? Why could he not wait for me to come 
up to Tokyo ? 

“ I will tell you because the freedom for it came 
to me. But that freedom must be lost for ever before 
long.” 

Repeating these words over and over again, I 
racked my brain to understand their meaning. Then 
suddenly I was seized with uneasiness. I tried to 
read more, when my brother called out to me from 
the direction of my father’s room. I stood up, 
frightened again. I ran through the corridor and 
went into the room. I realized that my father’s 
last moment had finally come. 


While I was away, the doctor had arrived and 


MY PARENTS AND I 


137 


was in my father’s room. He was going to give my 
father a redial injection again, to make him com- 
fortable. Resting after last night’s fatigue, the nurse 
was asleep in the other room, and my brother, who 
was not used to such things, went about the room, 
not knowing what to do. As he saw me, he sat 
down, saying, “ Come and help us.” I put an oiled 
paper under my father’s body, helping the doctor in 
place of my brother. 

My father became a little better. The doctor, 
having inspected the result of the redial injection, 

; left us, after sitting close to his pillow about half an 

hour. As he left, he said he would come again, 
adding that we should send for him anytime if any- 
: thing happened to my father. 

I left the room where every moment was threat- 
ened with danger and tried to read the sensei’s letter 
again. But I could not feel the slightest composure, 
j Scarcely had I sat at my desk than I fancied that my 

, brother was about to call me. I thought that when 

I was called for the second time it would be surely 
f my father’s last moment. This terrible anticipation 

[ made my hands tremble. I turned over the pages 

| of the letter mechanically. My eyes saw orderly 

j rows of letters written within the lines. But they 

I could not catch any meaning from them. There 

j was hardly room enough in my mind even to pick 

i up some words or sentences now and then. I turned 

i the pages one by one till I came to the last page, 

'■ and I was going to put the letter on my desk, folding 

i 

• . ■ ' ^ ' ' ' 

l- : : : - : 

J - J 


138 


KOKORO 



it in its original creases, when my eye caught a sen- 
tence neat the end. “ By the time this letter reaches 
you, l shall no longer be in this world, I shall be 
dead.” 

I was struck. I felt my bosom, which had been 
restless till then, freeze all at once. I turned over 
the pages again beginning with the last page, and 
read on inversely at the rate of one sentence to each 
page. Attempting to find out what I ought to know 
in a few minutes, I tried to pierce the dancing words 
with my eyes. All I wanted to know then was the 
question of whether he was alive or not. His past 
— his dusky past that he promised to impart to me 
was quite unnecessary for me. Turning over the 
pages inversely from end to beginning, I impatiently 
folded the long letter which would not give me the 
information that I needed. 

I went to the threshold of my father’s room 
to see his condition. It was unexpectedly quiet 
about his bed. I waved my hand to my mother 
who sat there with a helpless, tired face, and asked, 
“ How is Father ? ” She replied, “ He seems to be 
a little better now.” I put my face just before his 
eyes, and asked, “ How are you ? Do you feel a little 
better after the rectal injection ? ” He nodded, and 
said distinctly, “ Thank you.” His mind was not so 
vague as we expected. 

I left him again, and returned to my room. I 
examined the time-table, at the same time looking 
at my watch. Suddenly I stood up, tidied my obi, 


MY PARENTS AND I 


139 


and threw the sensei’s letter into my sleeve. Then 
i I went out from the kitchen door. I ran to the 

j dodtor’s house with all my might. I wanted him 

to give his opinion clearly whether my father would 
I live two or three days more. I wanted to ask him 

to maintain my father’s life by every means. Un- 
fortunately, the dodtor was not at home. I had no 
time to wait for his return, nor composure to sit 
still in his room. I at once got into a rickshaw, and 
hurried to the station. 

Putting a piece of paper against the wall of the 
station, I wrote a pencilled note to my mother and 
brother. It was quite a simple one, but I thought 
it better than to run away without any explanation, 
and asked the rickshaw-man to take it to my home. 
Then, making up my mind, I jumped into the train 
for Tokyo. In the rumbling third-class carriage, I 
took the sensei’s letter out of my sleeve again, and 
at last read it through. 


I . ;• \ . :• ; ;■ 



PART III 

THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


1 

D URING the summer, I received two or three 
letters from you. I am sure it was in the 
second letter that you asked me to find a suitable 
position for you in Tokyo. When I read it, I wanted 
to do something for you. At least, I felt I ought 
to answer your letter. But I must own that I did 
not even try to find anything for you. As you know, 
it is truer to describe me as living quite alone in 
this world, than as having few friends, and so it is 
utterly impossible for a man like me even to attempt 
to find a position. But that is not the real point. 
To tell you the truth, I was too deeply absorbed in 
myself, and my future. Should I continue my ex- 
it istence which is like that of a lifeless mummy left 

behind among human beings, or — ? In those days, 
I shivered whenever I repeated this ‘ or ’ in my mind, 
like a man who came running to the edge of a preci- 
pice and suddenly looked down into the unfathom- 
able depth. I was a coward. I was tortured to the 
same extent that all other cowards have been. I 
must own without exaggeration that I was scarcely 
aware of your existence. Further, the question of 



!• 




140 


the sensei and his last letter 141 

seemed like nonsense to me, of not the slightest 
importance. I was pressed by a thing far more im- 
portant to me. With your letter still in the letter- 
holder, I continued to sink deeper into myself, with 
my arms crossed. A man, whose family is fairly well- 
to-do, seeking for a position as soon as he finishes 
school ! Thus bitterly I sometimes thought of you 
far away. I make this confession only to show you 
how I regret not having written to you. I have no 
intention of being rude only to anger you. I am 
sure you will understand me if you read this letter. 
At any rate, as I have been silent when 1 ought not 
to, I want to beg your pardon for the omission. 

Afterwards, I wired you. To tell you the truth, 
I just wanted to see you, and to tell you my past as 
you once asked me to do. When you wired me 
stating that you could not come up to Tokyo then, 
I gazed at that telegram for a long time in disappoint- 
ment. You, seeming not to have been satisfied with 
the telegram, sent me a long letter, so that I could 
perfectly understand the circumstances that detained 
you at home. It would be impossible to regard you 
as discourteous. How could you leave your home, 
when your dear father was seriously ill ? It was my 
selfishness in forgetting all about his illness that was 
to blame. — Indeed, I had forgotten your father when 
I sent you that telegram, though it was I who had 
always advised you to take good care of him, ex- 
plaining that his illness was a serious one. Such is my 
inconsistency. Perhaps this contradictory character 


142 


KOKORO 




is due to my past which constantly oppresses me, 
and not to my natural perversity. Forgive my sel- 
fishness, for I myself am well aware of it. 

When I read your letter — the last letter that 
you wrote to me, I felt I had done you a wrong. 
I attempted to write an answer, to beg your pardon, 
but stopped without finishing a single line, because, 
I knew that if I wrote at all it must be this letter, 
and it was a little too early for that. That was why 
I wired you again, simply stating that I could manage 
without you. 


Then 1 began to write this. I was terribly an- 
noyed by my inability to express the events and 
thoughts as I liked, unaccustomed as I have been to 
such a task. Sometimes I almost gave up this obli- 
gation to you. But though 1 threw down my pen 
determined to stop, it was useless. In an hour, I 
wanted to continue. You may think this due to my 
sense of duty. I, too, don’t deny that. As you know, 
as I am leading a solitary existence, with hardly any 
intercourse with the world, there is nothing to be 
called obligation rooted anywhere in my life, how- 
ever hard I look around me. I don’t know whether 
I became like this on purpose or by accident, but I 
have lived, curtailing my obligations as much as 
possible. But this is not all through indifference to 
duty, but because of a super-sensitive attitude to- 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


143 


ward it, which dries up my energy and makes me 
unable to endure all its stimuli. That is why I decid- 
ed upon an inadrive life. And if I promise at all I 
am exceedingly disturbed if I do not keep that pro- 
mise. So I am obliged to take up the pen again, if 
only to get rid of my sense of unfulfilled obligation. 

Besides, I want to write. Apart from the sense 
of duty, I long to record my past, which I alone 
possess, because it was experienced only by myself. 
Then perhaps it is a pity to die without confiding it 
to another. Somehow, I feel like this. But if I 
have no one but an unappreciative listener, I think 
it might be better to bury it with my miserable body. 
In fact, if you had never existed, my past would 
never have been shared with another, either directly 
or indirectly. I want to tell my past to you alone, 
among all the millions of people born in Japan. Be- 
cause you are sincere. Because you said that you 
wanted in earnest to learn a living lesson from life 
itself 

I am going to cast upon your head the dark 
shadow of life unreservedly. But don’t be afraid. 
Gaze into the darkness, and grasp whatever will 
help you. Of course, I refer only to spiritual dark- 
ness. I was born with a strong sense of right and 
wrong. Also I was brought up in a stridtly moral 
way. My ethical ideas might be very different from 
those of the younger generation. If it is so, anyway 
they are my own. They are not a borrowed dress 
hired for a special occasion. So I presume it will be 



144 KOKORO 

of some use to you, who are now entering upon 
maturity. 

You may remember that you tried to discuss 
with me some of the current problems of thought. 
You know very well the attitude that I took then. I 
did not think lightly of your opinions, but I could 
not resped: them. There was no background in 
them, and you were too young to have your ex- 
periences. I often laughed, and you often gave me 
a dissatisfied look, till you pressed me to unfold my 
past before you as if it were a roll of pidures. It 
was then that I felt resped for you. Because you 
unreservedly showed me your resolution to catch 
something alive from my being, and to sip the warm 
blood running in my body, by cutting my heart. At 
that time, I was still living, and did not want to die. 
So I rejeded your request, promising to satisfy you 
some day. Now I am going to destroy my heart 
myself, and pour my blood into your veins. I shall 
be happy if a new life can enter into your bosom, 
when my heart has stopped beating. 

3 

I was not twenty when I lost my parents. I 
remember my wife telling you once that they died 
from the same illness. Moreover, as my wife inti- 
mated, they died in quick succession, one can say 
almost together. To tell you the truth, my father’s 
illness was that dreadful typhus, which infeded my 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


145 


mother who had nursed him. 

I was the only son born to those two. My 
father had been fairly well-to-do, so I was brought 
up comfortably. When I think of my past, I feel 
that if my parents had not died then, or if one of 
them had survived, I could have kept to this day a 
generous disposition resulting from that life of 
comfort. 

I was left absolutely alone, in blank helpless- 
ness. I had neither knowledge, nor experience. 
Nor had I proper judgement. When my father 
died, my mother could not sit beside him. When 
my mother died, she did not know even about my 
father’s death. 1 don’t know whether she realized 
it, or whether she really believed that he was better, 
as she was told. She only asked my uncle to help 
me after she died. She said, trying to point to me 
as I sat beside her, “ Please take care of my boy.” 
Before their illness, it had been decided that I was 
to go up to Tokyo, and she seemed to be intending 
to refer to this. But when she added only “To 
Tokyo,” my uncle said at once, “ All right. Don’t 
worry about him.” Perhaps she had a constitution 
strong enough to endure high temperature. My 
uncle praised her, saying to me, “ How firm she has 
been i ” But now I wonder whether it had been 
her will or not. Of course she knew the dreadful 
name of my father’s illness. She also knew that 
she had caught it. But I think there is yet room 
for doubting whether she believed that she was go- 




146 


KOKORO 


ing to die from this illness. Besides, her words, 
spoken when she had a high temperature, sometimes 
did not remain in her mind at all, however clear 
and reasonable they had been. So — But this is not 
what I am going to say. Yet my habit of ana- 
lyzing things of this kind and looking at them from 
every direction was even then strong. I think I 
must call your special attention to this at the very 
beginning of my letter and point out that as an ex- 
ample of this habit such an account as this, which 
is not important for the main story in question, will 
be of some use. So please read on, reconsidering 
it in this way. As this trait affects my judgement 
of men’s behaviour, I think I have come to doubt 
others’ moral sense all the more. It is certain that 
this quality has positively and strongly worked upon 
my worries and sufferings, so I want you to bear this 
in mind. 

As my story will become difficult to understand, 
if I divert from the main line like this, let us go 
back to it. I fancy that I am writing this long letter 
in a somewhat calmer mood than that of others who 
go the same way as I shall go. The sound of trams, 
which we begin to hear when the world has gone to 
sleep, has already stopped. Outside the shutters, 
the poor insedrs have begun to chirp feebly, in such 
a tone as reminds us softly of the dewy autumn. 
My wife, who knows nothing, is enjoying the sleep 
of the innocent in the next room. When I begin 
to write, one letter after another is formed, with the 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


14 ? 


faint sound of my pen. I am sitting in front of my 
paper in rather a tranquil mood. Perhaps my pen 
will stray because of my inexperience in using it, but 
not I think because of my disturbed mind. 

4 

At any rate, I, left absolutely alone, had nothing 
to do but rely upon my uncle, as my mother had 
told me. As for my uncle, he took charge of every- 
thing and took care of me, and managed so that I 
could go up to Tokyo as I had wanted. 

I came to Tokyo, and entered the high school. 
The students of the high school in those days were 
far more savage and coarse than they are now. One 
of my acquaintances quarrelled with an artisan at 
midnight, and hurt his head with geta. 1 This student 
was drunk, and while they were striking at each 
other with all their might, the artisan snatched his 
school cap in which his name was clearly written on 
a diamond-shaped white cloth stuck in the lining. 
So there was trouble, and the police-station was go- 
ing to communicate with the school, but his friends, 
doing all they could for him, succeeded in keeping 
it from public notice. You, who have been brought 
up in the refined atmosphere of the present, are sure 
to regard such violent conduct as this as foolishness. 
Indeed, I, too, feel quite the same as you. But to 


1 Wooden clogs. 



148 


KOKORO 


balance that defect those students had a sort of sim- 
plicity lacking in the modern students. In those 
days the money that my uncle gave me every month 
was far less than the amount that your father sent 
you. (Of course this was partly owing to the dif- 
ference in the cost of living.) Yet I did not feel any 
want. Moreover, among many class-mates, I was 
never one of those poor students who had to envy 
others’ affluence. 1 think that rather 1 belonged to 
those who were envied by others, because, besides 
the fixed amount sent by my uncle every month, I 
could ask him for money for books (I liked to buy 
books even in those days) and for special expenses, 
and I could spend as much as I liked. 

I, who knew nothing, not only trusted my uncle, 
but also, as if he had been a rare creature, respected 
him, always feeling grateful to him. He was an am- 
bitious man. He was once a representative for the 
prefedtural assembly. For that- reason perhaps, I 
remember he had some connection with the political 
parties. He was my father’s younger brother, but 
his character seems to have developed in quite an 
opposite direction from my father’s. My father was 
all uprightness, and carefully protected the property 
that he received from his ancesters. Flower arrange- 
ment and tea ceremony were his hobbies. Also he 
liked to read collections of poetry. He seemed to 
have a deep interest in pictures and curios. Our 
house was in the country, but sometimes from the 
neighbouring city about four miles away — where my 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 149 

uncle lived — the curio-dealer took the trouble to 
come and show him some pictures or incense-burn- 
ers. My father, in a word, could be called a man of 
means. He was a country gentleman, with consider- 
ably refined tastes. So as regards character, he was 
quite different from his urban brother who was a 
busy man of affairs. Yet they strongly loved each 
other. My father often spoke of him as a trustworthy 
man, far abler than himself. He sometimes remarked 
that a man like him who inherited property from 
his parents did not develop his ability, because it 
was not necessary for him to fight with the world. 
Both my mother and I heard these words. He seem- 
ed to say them as a lesson for me. “ You had better 
remember this,” so saying, he looked at me so 
deliberately that I have never forgotten it. How 
could I doubt my uncle, who was trusted and praised 
by my father like this? Even if my parents had 
lived he would have been my pride. When I had 
to ask his help after my parents’ death, he was not 
merely my pride, but a person necessary to my ex- 
istence. 

5 

When I returned to my native place to spend 
my first summer holidays, my uncle and his wife 
were living in my house as its new master and mis- 
tress. They had promised to do this before I went 
up to Tokyo, for as long as I, the sole inhabitant of 


150 


KOKORO 


the house, lived in Tokyo, we could not think of 
any other way. 

In those days my uncle seemed to be connected 
with various companies in the town. He laughed, 
say in g that it was far more convenient for him to 
live in his own house in the town than to remove 
to mine four miles away from the centre of his busi- 
ness. This was when we consulted about what ar- 
rangement would be best which would permit me 
to live in Tokyo after my parents’ death. Ours was 
rather an old family, and comparatively well known 
in the neighbourhood. I presume it is also true in 
your neighbourhood that it is considered rather a 
misfortune to sell or destroy a house belonging to 
an old family while there is still an heir. Now of 
course such things never trouble me, but at that 
time, being only a child, I was perplexed by the 
dilemma arising from my desire to study in Tokyo 
and my duty to maintain my own house. 

My uncle, unable to find any other way, con- 
sented to occupy my house, adding that it would 
probably suit him very well to have his own house 
in the town, and go backwards and forwards to 
mine. Of course I had no objection to this pro- 
posal. I wanted to go up to Tokyo under any con- 
dition. 

Childish as I was, 1 still looked upon my house 
in the country with the fond eyes of my heart, though 
my body was not there. I saw it with the heart of 
a traveller who had still a home of his own to which 


I® 




THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 151 

he could return. Even I, who left my native place 
yearning for Tokyo, felt strongly that I had to come 
back home during the holidays. After a day of seri- 
ous study and pleasant amusement, I often dreamed 
of that house to which I expedted to return when 
the holidays came. 

I don’t know how my uncle took care of the 
two houses during my absence. But when I reached 
home, all his family had assembled in my house. 
Perhaps his children, who went to the schools in 
the town, spent most of their time in the town- 
house, but they had come to mine, partly to enjoy 
their holidays in the country. 

All were pleased to welcome me home. I was 
glad to find my house livelier and merrier than when 
my parents were alive. My uncle turned out his 
eldest son, who occupied the room which had been 
mine, and told me to take it. I said it did not mat- 
ter, for there were many empty rooms in the house, 
but my uncle insisted that the house was mine and 
that particular room belonged to me. 

With nothing unpleasant or sad but the memo- 
ries of my father and mother, 1 spent that summer 
with my uncle’s family, and returned to Tokyo again. 
The only event which cast a shadow upon my heart 
was the united advice of my uncle and his wife that 
I, who had just entered the high school, had better 
marry. I remember hearing the same thing three 
or four times during the summer. At first, its sod? 
denness astonished me. The second time, I posi- 


KOKORO 


152 

tively declined to listen to it. But when they re- 
peated it the third time, I asked them why they 
suggested such a thing. It was quite simple, and 
all they said was that 1 should return home as soon 
as possible and take care of this house with my wife. 

I had been thinking that if only I returned home 
during the holidays it was enough. To take care of 
the household as my father had done, and to have 
a wife to help me, sounded quite reasonable. Es- 
pecially I, who knew the custom of the country, 
understood this well. Perhaps I was not absolutely 
opposed to following it. But having just gone to 
Tokyo to study, the prospedt seemed very distant, 
as if I were looking at something through a tele- 
scope. Finally I left my home again without consent- 
ing to my uncle’s wishes. 

6 

After that I forgot all about it. Among all 
those youthful faces which surrounded me there was 
not one which looked as if it belonged to a married 
man. Every one without exception was free, and 
seemed to be single. Perhaps if I had penetrated 
into the other side of their lives, I might have found 
some among these carefree students who had been 
obliged to marry through some family circumstances, 
but childish as I was, I did not realize that. Be- 
sides I think those who were put in such especial 
circumstances were reservedly careful not to talk 






THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 153 

about their personal affairs so entirely remote from 
student’s life. When I thought about it later, I 
found that I myself was among this number. But 
without even realizing this, I went along the road of 
learning, innocent and content. 

When I finished the first year, I roped up my 
basket-trunk again, and returned to my native place 
where my parents’ grave lay. I saw the unchanged 
faces of my uncle and his wife and their children in 
my parents’ house as I had done the year before. 
Again, I smelt the smell of my old home there, the 
smell which was still dear to me. If only to break 
the monotony of the school life, this atmosphere 
was certainly precious to me. 

But in the midst of this atmosphere, the same 
kind of atmosphere in which I had grown up, 1 was 
suddenly confronted by my uncle with my marriage 
problem. What he said was only the repetition of 
the previous year’s advice. The reason was the 
same as before. But while he had no definite plan 
the year before, this time he had found the very 
girl for me ; no other than his own daughter, my 
cousin. He pointed out that it would be convenient 
for both families if I married her, and that my father, 
too, had referred to it while he was alive. I thought 
that it probably would be a good arrangement and 
that my father had probably such intention. But I 
realized this for the first time when I had heard my 
uncle’s words, never before. So I was amazed. 
But at the same time I could well understand the 


154 


KOKORO 


propriety of his desire. Perhaps I was thoughtless.^ 
I admit that I was careless, but perhaps the chief 
reason for my surprise was my indifference to my 
cousin. Ever since I was a child, 1 had visited my 
uncle’s in the town, and frequently stayed for sever- 
al days, and my cousin and I were always good 
friends. You know that a love affair never occurs 
by any chance between brother and sister. Perhaps 
1 am extending this well known fadt for my con- 
venience too far, but 1 think that between a man 
and a woman, who always see each other and are 
too friendly, the freshness which creates the attrac- 
tion necessary for love is lost. As we can relish the 
real fragrance of incense only when it has just begun 
to bum, and as we can taste sake only at the first 
sip, so there is also a critical moment in the impulse 
of love. 1 cannot think otherwise. If we once pass 
that moment without adtion, the oftener we see each 
other, the duller become our impulses to love, and 
on the other hand we become more friendly. I 
could not persuade myself to marry my cousin, in 
spite of my effort to reconsider the matter. 

My uncle said they could postpone our mar- 
riage till my graduation, if I insisted upon it. But 
quoting the proverb, “ Do what is good as soon as 
you can,” he added he wanted to finish our marriage 
ceremony at once, if possible. To me, who had 
not the slightest intention of marrying her, it made 
no difference. I declined it again. My uncle looked 
uncomfortable, and my cousin cried. She was un- 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 155 

happy, as a woman who had been rejected, but she 
was far from broken-hearted. I knew quite well 
that she did not love me any more than I loved her. 
I went to Tokyo again. 

7 

It was at the beginning of summer a year later 
that I returned home the third time. I always fled 
from Tokyo, as soon as I finished the yearly exami- 
nations. So dear was my native place to me. You 
know this feeling too, don’t you 1 The air of the 
place where one was born has a different hue ; the 
smell of the earth, too, is peculiar to the place. 
There were remembrances of my father and mother 
floating deliciously. To spend the two months of 
the year, July and August, like a snake in a hole, 
quite still and warm, wrapped up in those dear 
memories, was more soothing to me than anything 
else. 

Simple as I was, I thought there was no need 
to worry about my marriage affair with my cousin. 
I believed that I could decline it if I was not disposed 
to it, and that the affair would end after my refusal. 
So in spite of my stubbornness in not acting as my 
uncle had wished, I was quite calm. I had never 
felt any anxiety during that whole year, and returned 
home as happy as before. 

But my uncle’s attitude had changed. He would 
not take me to his bosom with the same cordiality 


156 


KOKORO 



as before. Yet I, who had been brought up with 
loving care, did not mark this for several days. But 
I began to feel something strange about him sud- 
denly, and realized that he was not the only person 
that had changed. His wife, too, behaved strangely, 
as did my cousin also. Even his son, who had writ- 
ten to me asking about the Tokyo Higher School of 
Commerce which he was intending to enter, was 
different. 

My nature was such that I could not help think- 
ing about it. Why had my feelings changed like 
this 1 O no, not mine, but why was their attitude 
so altered ? Suddenly I wondered if my dead parents 
had washed my dull eyes so that I could clearly see 
the world. I believed in some corner of my heart 
that my parents, though they had disappeared from 
this world, would still love me as they had done 
while they were alive. Although even at that time 
I was never dull-minded, the weight of superstition 
that I received from my ancesters was also hidden 
in my blood with a strong force. I think it lies in 
me even now. 

I, all alone, climbed the hill, and knelt before 
my parents’ grave, partly to express my grief, but 
partly to thank them. I prayed them to protect my 
future destiny, feeling as if my future happiness 
were still held in their hands as they lay under this 
cold stone. You may laugh, and I don’t wonder, 
but I was such a youth. 

My world completely changed in the twinkling 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 157 

of an eye. But this was not my first experience. I 
think it was when I was fifteen or sixteen that I was 
astonished to discover suddenly for the first time 
the fadt that there was beauty existing in this world. 
Many a time I doubted my eyes, and many a time 
I rubbed them, crying out at the same time, “ How 
beautiful ! ” It is at about that age that both boys 
and girls, if I may use the popular expression, are 
awakened to the sense of sex. It was then that I 
could look at women for the first time as the re- 
presentatives of beauty in the world. My blind 
eyes were opened suddenly toward women whose 
existence I had not noticed before. After that, my 
world was entirely renewed. 

This realization of my uncle’s attitude could 
perhaps be compared with the former awakening. 
I understood all at once. The realization came sud- 
denly, without any expectation or preparation. He 
and his family suddenly looked entirely different 
from what they had been before. I was amazed, 
and wondered what would become of me if I left 
the matter alone. 

8 

I began to feel that I should be ashamed to 
face my dead parents if I did not secure the minute 
information about my property which I had hitherto 
entirely entrusted to my uncle. As he himself was 
always remarking, my uncle was busy and did not 


158 


KOKORO 


return to the same house every night. If he stayed 
about two days in my house, he spent the following 
three days in his own house in the town. Thus 
going backwards and forwards, he looked restless 
every day, and often uttered the word busy, as if it 
were his favourite word. When I did not doubt 
him, I thought he was really busy. Also I took it 
cynically that he was like this because it was modern 
to appear busy. But when I watched this busy 
uncle with eyes made keen by the purpose of having 
a long talk with him about my property, I could not 
help feeling that it was only his excuse to avoid me. 
It was not easy for me to find the opportunity of 
catching him. 

I heard from one of my old class-mates of the 
middle school that my uncle had a mistress in the 
town. It was not at all strange for one of his dis- 
position to do such a thing, but I, having never 
heard such a rumour while my father was alive, was 
astonished. This class-mate told me many other 
things about my uncle. Among other things I heard 
he, who had been at one time almost on the verge 
of failure, had suddenly become prosperous during 
the past two or three years. This served to streng- 
then my suspicion. 

Finally I began negotiations with my uncle. 
The word negotiation might be too strong, but our 
talk naturally took such a process that I cannot 
but describe it by this kind of word. My uncle 
would continue to regard me as a child. From the 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 159 

beginning, I faced him with eyes of doubt. It was 
natural that the question could not be solved peace- 
fully. 

I am sorry that time does not permit me to 
describe in detail the process of this negotiation. 
To speak the truth, I have far more important things 
than this to tell you. From the beginning of this 
letter, I could barely control my pen which was eager 
to reach that account. I, who lost for ever the op- 
portunity to have a quiet talk with you, am obliged 
to omit what I long to write ; the result not only of 
my inexperience in writing, but also of my having 
to save precious time. 

You may remember even now what I once said 
to you — that there is no man born wicked in this 
world, and that one must take care, because many 
honest persons are influenced by circumstances to 
be suddenly dishonest. Then you reminded me 
that I was excited, and asked me what circumstances 
turned good people into bad. When I replied with 
the single word ‘ money ’, you looked dissatisfied. I 
remember quite well that look of yours. Now I 
confess to you that 1 was thinking of my uncle at 
that time. I was thinking of him with hatred, as 
an example of the fadt that ordinary men become 
suddenly wicked at the glimpse of money, and of 
the fadt that there can be nothing trustworthy in 
this world. My answer might be unsatisfactory to 
you, who were going to plunge into the depth of 
the world of thought. It may be too matter-of-fadt. 


160 


KOKORO 


But to me it was a living answer. Indeed was I not 
excited? I believe that commonplace ideas pas- 
sionately expressed are more effective in real life 
than the original inventions of a detached intellect. 
Because it is the heat of the blood that impresses 
us, for in addition to the words which reverberate 
in the air, the emotion by its intensity pierces to 
the soul. 

9 

In a word, my uncle cheated me of my pro- 
perty, which he was able to do easily during the 
three years of my absence. I, who had been not at 
all anxious about putting everything in his charge, 
was really a fool from the point of view of the world. 
If criticized from an unworldly point of view, per- 
haps 1 may be called a rare example of humanity 
extremely innocent and pure. When I think of 
myself in those days, I feel mortified at my credulity, 
and wonder why I was not born less innocent. But 
sometimes I feel a longing to restore that genuine 
unstained self and live as I did long ago. Remember, 
I, whom you know, am the one soiled with dust. 
If we call those who have been stained longer one’s 
superiors, I may certainly be your superior. 

If I had married his daughter as he desired, 
would it have proved more advantageous to me from 
the point of view of money ? I think this is un- 
questionably plain. My uncle schemed to press me 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 161 

to marry his daughter. His advice came rather from 
the far baser motive of interest, than from any desire 
to advance the convenience of both families. I did 
not love my cousin, but 1 did not dislike her. But 
when 1 thought about the situation later, I felt 
quite pleased that I had refused her. Perhaps it did 
not make much difference, but, though I had been 
cheated materially, I persisted in my will not to 
marry her, and in this point, I disappointed him. 
But this is merely a trifle, not worthy of being ques- 
tioned. Especially to you, an outsider, this may seem 
extremely foolish obstinacy. 

Between my uncle and me, another relative 
came as a mediator. But I did not trust the man at 
all. I not only distrusted him, but regarded him as 
my enemy. When I realized that my uncle had 
deceived me, 1 concluded that the others would 
certainly cheat me. If my uncle, whom my father 
so praised, turned out like this, what could be ex- 
pected of others ? This was my logic. 

But they collected all the property which be- 
longed to me, which was far less than I expected. 
There were only two ways for me to take ; one, to 
accept it without a word, or to act publicly against 
my uncle. I was mortified, and at the same time 
puzzled. I feared that the lawsuit would take a 
long time. I thought it would be extremely uncom- 
fortable for me as a student to be robbed of the 
precious hours for study. At last, after much 
thought, I decided to ask my old friend in the town 


162 


KOKORO 


to change all I got into currency. He pointed out 
that this was not advantageous to me, but I did not 
listen to him. At that time I made up my mind to 
leave my native place for ever. I swore to myself 
not to see my uncle again. 

Before I left the country, I visited my parents’ 
grave again. I have never seen it since. I think the 
opportunity of seeing it will never come to me 
again. 

My old friend managed everything as I told 
him. But this was long after I reached Tokyo. It 
was not easy to sell fields in the country ; besides 
there was some danger of being cheated when people 
got to know about me, so the money I received was 
far less than the value of the land. I confess that 
all my property consisted of some public bond which 
I took with me to Tokyo, and this money sent by 
my friend later. As my inheritance from my par- 
ents, it was undoubtedly very much diminished. I 
felt all the more unhappy because I myself had not 
been responsible for it. Yet it was more than enough 
for me to live on as a student. In fadt, I could not 
use half of the interest. Because of this materially 
ample student’s life, I fell into circumstances which 
I had never dreamed of. 

10 : 

Not being in straitened circumstances, I began 
to think of leaving the noisy boarding-house, and 


THE SENSEI AND] HIS LAST; LETTER 163 

thought it might be possible to have my own home. 
But the trouble of buying utensils, and finding an 
old woman to keep the house, who must be honest, 
so that I should never be anxious when I went out, 
made it rather hard to carry out my plan. One 
day, idly thinking that I should find a house as the 
first step, I took a walk, going down Hongo Hill 
westward, and walking straight up the slope of Koi- 
shikawa toward Denzuin. Since the tram-way was 
made, the view has become entirely different, but 
in those days, on the left-hand side was the earthen 
wall of the Arsenal, and on the right was a vacant 
plot, which I can call neither a field nor a hill, and 
which was covered all over with grass. I stood 
amidst that grass, and accidentally looked at the 
cliff in front of me. It is rather pretty even now, 
but in those days, the westward view was very much 
different. It was all green as far as I could see, and 
my nerves found a rest. Suddenly I wondered if 
there was any house suitable for me in this neigh- 
bourhood. So I proceeded northward along a nar- 
row lane across the grassy field. The unstable 
houses, which even now are not very imposing, were 
in extreme disorder in those days. I went through 
an alley, or turned a by-street, and walked round 
and round that district. Finally I asked a coarse- 
confedtioner’s wife whether she knew a neat little 
house to let. “ O let me see,” so saying, she thought 
a while, with her head bent on one side, but she 
seemed not to know of any. I concluded that it 


164 


KOKORQ 


was hopeless to find one, and turned to go, when 
she asked, “ Wouldn’t you like to live in a family ? ” 
Somehow, I changed my mind, and began to think 
it better to live quietly in an ordinary home, than 
to be worried with many a housekeeping matter. 
So sitting down in that shop, I asked her all about it. 

It was the home of a certain officer’s family. 
She said that the master had died in a war, perhaps 
the one between China and Japan. Till about a 
year ago, they had lived in Ichigaya, near the School 
for Regimental Officers. Then, as the mansion was 
too vast for them to live in, having even a stable 
for horses, they sold it and moved to this neigh- 
bourhood. But suffering from loneliness, they asked 
her to find someone suitable to live with them. She 
told me that there was no one living in this house 
except a widow, her only daughter, and their maid. 
I felt that it might be quiet and suit me. But I was 
afraid that I might be instantly refused, as a student 
whose character and family were unknown to them, 
if I suddenly ventured to call at that house. I won- 
dered if I should return. But as a student, I was 
not so poorly dressed. Besides I had my university 
cap on. You may laugh, saying what was the im- 
portance of a university cap. But the university 
students in those days were very much more trusted 
in the world than they are now. I even found a 
sort of self-reliance in this square cap then, and 
visited that officer’s family as I was told, without 
any letter of introduction. . 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 165 

I saw the widow, and explained why I had come. 
She asked me many questions about my native place, 
my school, and my special subject. Perhaps she 
found something to assure her ; she gave an answer 
there and then that 1 could come any time. She 
was an upright, clear-minded woman. I admired 
her, thinking that this was probably the usual type 
of an officer’s wife. At the same time, I was sur- 
prised, and wondered why she felt lonely, having a 
disposition like this. 

11 

I removed at once. I took the room in which 
1 talked with the widow when I first came to see her. 
It was the best one in that house. In those days, 
houses which could be called high-class boarding- 
houses were beginning to be built in Hongo, so I 
knew what the best room that a student could have 
looked like. The room, of which I became the new 
owner, was far finer than any of those. For the pres- 
ent, it even seemed to be too luxurious for a student. 

It was an eight-mat room. Beside the alcove, 
there were a pair of shelves at different levels, and 
a closet six feet long at the opposite side of the veran- 
dah. There was no window, but the sun shone bright- 
ly through the open verandah in front of the room. 

On the day of my arrival, I looked at the flow- 
ers in the alcove and the koto 1 leaning against the 


1 A kind of musical instrument 


166 


KOKORO 


wall beside the vase. I liked neither of them at all. 
As I was brought up beside my father, whose hob- 
bies were poetry, writing, and the tea ceremony, I 
had had somewhat Chinese taste since I was a child. 
For that reason perhaps, I had acquired a habit of 
feeling contempt for such gay decorations as these. 

Though the curios and the pictures my father 
had picked up while he was alive had disappeared 
while they were in the hands of my uncle, there 
were some left. Most of them I entrusted to my 
old friend when I left my native place, but I brought 
four or five interesting pictures in the bottom of my 
basket-trunk. I was looking forward to hanging 
them in the alcove as soon as I removed. But having 
seen the flowers and the koto, I suddenly lost the 
courage. When I knew later that these flowers were 
arranged to welcome me, I smiled sardonically to 
myself. As for the koto, which had been there from 
before, they had to leave it there, because there was 
no other suitable place for it. 

When I tell you things like this, a young 
woman’s shadow may naturally sweep through your 
head. In me, too, such a curiosity had been adtive 
already from the beginning. Perhaps this poisonous 
feeling destroyed my naturalness, or I was not used 
to people, I was quite upset when I was introduced 
to her. She, too, blushed. 

I had been imagining all about this girl, with 
the widow’s figure and manner in mind. But that 
fancy was not very flattering to her. I concluded 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 167 

that the widow was like this because she was an 
officer’s wife, and imagined that, as her daughter, 
the girl might be like that. Thus I extended my 
supposition. But it was all extinguished at the 
moment when I saw her, and the perfume of woman 
which I could not imagine tilt then newly came into 
my mind. After that, 1 no longer disliked the flow- 
er arrangement in the alcove, and no longer regarded 
the koto as a nuisance. 

Those flowers were changed for new ones re- 
gularly when they began to wither. The koto, too, 
was often carried away into the opposite room be- 
yond the corridor, bent key-like. I listened to that 
koto being played as I sat at my desk, with my chin 
on my hands. I could not judge whether it was 
well done or not. But considering she did not play 
any complicated tune, I thought that she was not 
skilful. I concluded that her koto was the same as 
her flower arrangement. I could appreciate the latter 
well, and she was never good at it. 

Yet she did not hesitate to ornament my alcove 
with many kinds of flowers. Her way of arranging 
them, however, was always the same. Also the vase 
was never changed. But as for her music, it was 
far funnier than the flowers. All I heard was the 
tone that the chords made, being never able to 
hear her voice. She sang, but in such a low voice 
that one might think her whispering into another’s 
ears. Besides, she lost all her voice when she was 
scolded. 



168 


KOKORO 


But I was happy to look at these badly arranged 
flowers, and listened to the koto which seemed to be 
played unskilfully. 

12 

When I left my native place, I was already in 
a pessimistic frame of mind. At that time, the idea 
that human beings can never be relied upon seemed 
to have penetrated into the marrow of my bones. I 
began to regard my uncle and his wife, whom I held 
as my enemies, and my other relatives, as the re- 
presentatives of humanity. Even in the train, I 
began furtively to watch my neighbours. When 
some of them began to talk to me, I was inclined to 
strengthen my defensive attitude. My heart was 
melancholy. Often it hung upon me so heavily 
that I felt as if I had swallowed a lump of lead. Yet 
my nerves, as 1 have told you just now, were greatly 
sharpened. 

It seems to me that this was the chief reason 
why I tried to leave my boarding-house in Tokyo. 
Of course, I entertained the idea of having my own 
home because I had money at my disposal, but if I 
myself had not changed, I would never have troubl- 
ed myself about my lodgings, however ample my 
pocket-money might have been. 

Even after I moved to Koishikawa, I could not 
rest my strained nerves for a while. I looked about 
me, so restless that I was ashamed of myself. It was 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 169 

only my mind and eyes which were lively, while my 
tongue began to be less adtive, which was strange. 
I sat at my desk in silence, watching at the same 
time the behaviour of those in the house as care- 
fully as a cat watches a mouse. I cast cautious eyes 
on them, till sometimes I felt sorry for them. Some- 
times I even hated myself, realizing that I was like a 
thief who was not going to steal anything. 

Surely you will wonder why such a man as I 
could have room in his mind to take any interest 
in the daughter, to look at her bad flower arrange- 
ment with a happy heart, and to listen to her un- 
skilful playing. I cannot answer this, but only 
relate it as one of the fadts in my life. Perhaps you 
can find an explanation for yourself, so I will only 
add a few words. I distrusted human beings as 
regards money, but I had not yet learned to be sus- 
picious in love. Thus the two apparently paradoxical 
points of view did not yet conflidt in my heart. 

As I always called the widow okusan , 1 I shall 
continue to speak of her thus. She said I was a 
quiet gentle youth. Also she praised my diligence. 
But she said nothing about the uneasy, troubled 
expression of my eyes, and my restlessness. I don’t 
know whether she was not aware of them, or she 
hesitated to refer to them, but she seemed to be 
entirely indifferent to them. At one time, too, she 


1 Usually used for addressing married women, can be translated into 
English as madam. 


170 


KOKORQ 


told me with much admiration that I was generous. 
Honest that I was, I blushed a little, and modestly 
repudiated this praise. Then she explained to me 
seriously that I probably did not know my own good 
qualities myself. At first, it had not been her in- 
tention to have a student like me to live with her. 
She appeared to have asked her neighbours to find 
one of those young officials to whom she could lend 
her room. So perhaps the idea of a man who was 
obliged to live in a single room because of his scanty 
salary had had some place in her mind. And she 
praised me as generous, comparing me with her im- 
aginary paying guest. In fadt, I might be generous 
about money, compared to those who were in strait- 
ened circumstances. But this was not a question 
of my disposition, so this had scarcely any relation 
to my inner life. But woman that she was, she 
tried to extend it to my whole being, and to describe 
my character with the same word. 

13 

This attitude of the okusan naturally affected 
my mood. After a while, my eyes began to stop 
their restless search, and I felt that my mind had 
come to rest where my body was sitting. In a word, 
it was perhaps the okusan and her family’s utter in- 
difference to my prejudiced looks and my distrustful 
manners that brought me that great happiness. My 
nerves became gradually calm, because nobody in 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 171 

the house paid attention to them. 

The okusan was a woman of experience, so per- 
haps she treated me like that on purpose, or perhaps 
she really thought me to be as generous as she said. 
It is possible to think that my restlessness was 
merely a phenomenon in my mind, and it did not 
affedt my appearance much, so perhaps the okusan 
was deceived. 

As my mind grew calmer, I gradually became 
more friendly with the family. I sometimes joked 
with both the okusan and her daughter. Sometimes 
I was called to the sitting-room to have tea, and 
sometimes I invited them to my own room and gave 
them cakes. I felt as if the range of my intercourse 
had become suddenly broader. Often the precious 
hours for study were disturbed by these new friends. 
But strangely I did not feel this as a disturbance at 
all. The okusan was of course a woman of leisure. 
I thought her daughter, who had flower arrange- 
ment and koto lessons besides her school-work, must 
be busy, but contrary to my expectation, she seemed 
to have ample time to spend as she liked. So we 
three gathered together and talked and idled when- 
ever we saw each other. 

It was usually the daughter who came to fetch 
me. Sometimes she came by way of the corridor, 
turning it squarely, and stood in front of my room, 
and sometimes she came through the sitting-room 
and showed her figure from behind the sliding-doors 
of the next room. There she stopped for a moment. 


172 


KOKORO 


then she was "sure to call my name and ask, “ Are 
you studying now ? ” Most of the time I sat gazing 
at one of those difficult books opened on the desk, 
so 1 might be considered a very diligent scholar. 
But to tell you the truth, I was not so absorbed in 
these books as I should have been. I was usually 
waiting for the girl to ask me to tea, though my eyes 
seemed to be glued to the page. If she did not come, 
it was my turn to leave my desk and stand in front 
of her room, saying, “ Are you studying now ? ” 

She occupied a six-mat room next to the sit- 
ting-room, and the okusan was either in the sitting- 
room or sitting with her daughter. They passed 
from one room to another, as if there were no parti- 
tion between them, for the sliding-doors formed no 
barrier. When I called from the corridor, it was 
always the mother who said, “ Come in.” The 
daughter scarcely answered, even though she was 
there. 

It happened sometimes that the daughter, com- 
ing into my room on Some errand, sat talking with 
me alone. On such an occasion, my heart was 
strangely affedted with uneasiness. I did not think 
it was merely because a young lady was sitting in 
front of me that I was uneasy. I began to be rest- 
less, and the unnatural attitude with which I was, 
as it were, betraying myself annoyed me. But she 
was quite calm. She was not shy, till I began to 
wonder whether she could be the same girl who 
could scarcely sing when she practised the koto. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 173 

Sometimes when she stayed too long, and her mother 
called her, she did not even rise quickly, though she 
answered that she was coming. Yet she was not 
childish. I knew that quite well. It was even clear 
to me that she was trying to make me understand 
this. 

■ ■ ' ,j 

14 

After she went away, I sighed, relieved. At 
the same time, I felt dissatisfied and sorry for her. 
Perhaps I was effeminate. You, the present-day 
youth, may perhaps think me so. But most of us, 
in those days, were like that. 

The okusan was almost always at home. When 
she went out at all, she did not leave us alone. I 
could not make out whether she managed this on 
purpose or not. I don’t like to tell you such a thing 
as this from my own mouth, but when I observed 
her carefully, she seemed to be cherishing a desire 
that her daughter and I should become more inti- 
mate. Yet on some occasions, she seemed to keep 
secret watch on me. I, who experienced such a thing 
for the first time, sometimes felt uncomfortable. 

I wanted her to decide upon one or the other 
of her two attitudes. From the point of view of 
reason alone, they were clearly a contradiction. 
But I, in whom the remembrances of my uncle were 
still fresh, could not but doubt further. I supposed 
that one of these attitudes was true, and the other 



174 


KOKORO 


was false, and wondered. Not only was I at a loss 
to find which was true, but also I could not under- 
stand why she assumed them. I, who, no matter 
how I tried, could not understand why she should 
have these two points of view, sometimes satisfied 
myself by casting all the blame upon the word 
woman. Anyhow, she was like that because she 
was a woman, a woman was a foolish creature. 
This was my conclusion, whenever my thought 
came to a stop, without finding any solution. 

I, who had such contempt for women, could 
not slight the daughter. My judgement was not 
adtive when I was with her, till it seemed entirely 
powerless. For her I entertained love which was 
almost faith. You may think it strange that I extend 
this word used exclusively to religion to a young 
lady, but I firmly believe even now that real love does 
not much differ from religious emotion. Whenever 
I looked at her face, I felt as if I were becoming 
beautiful. When 1 thought of her, noble emotion 
seemed to take hold of my being at once. If there 
are two sides in the wonderful thing love, the holy 
emotion working on the higher side, and the sexual 
desire moving on the lower side, my love was cer- 
tainly the one which followed the higher trend. Of 
course I, as a human being, could not leave the 
flesh. But my eyes which looked at her, and my 
heart which thought about her, had not the slightest 
flavour of the flesh. 

As I felt antipathy to the mother, and at the 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 175 

same time my love for the daughter increased, the 
relation of us three became gradually more compli- 
cated. But that change was mostly the inner one, 
the one which would not show itself. Then I hap- 
pened to realize that I had misunderstood the oku- 
sart. I recognized her contradictory attitudes toward 
me and realized that they were both true. Besides, 
I began to think that those two things did not rule 
her mind by turns, but they existed in her bosom 
at the same moment. In a word, I observed that 
though it seemed to be contradictory that she kept 
watch upon me when she tried to make us attached 
to each other, she neither forgot nor denied her 
desire when she seemed to be watching me, but she 
still wanted us to love each other. I explained that 
she only disliked our attachment to go beyond what 
she approved as right. I, who had not the slightest 
intention of approaching the daughter in any but 
the most honourable way, thought that her anxiety 
was useless. But my feeling of antipathy toward 
her disappeared as soon as I understood her real 
motives. 

15 

When I considered carefully the behaviour of 
the okusan , I came to the conclusion that I was 
trusted by both the mother and the daughter. I 
even found some evidence that the mother had 
trusted me from the very beginning. This discovery 



176 KOKORO 

seemed rather strange to my mind which had be- 
come suspicious. 1 thought that women had more 
intuition than men. At the same time, I felt that 
it might be because of this quality that women were 
deceived by men. But I, who observed the okusan 
in this way, was ruled by the same strong intuition 
in my love for the daughter, which now makes me 
laugh. Because I trusted the daughter absolutely, 
even while I was vowing that I would never trust 
anyone, and yet the very trost which the okusan 
entertained toward me made me regard her as rather 
queer. 

I told them almost nothing about my native 
place, especially about the misfortune which had 
befallen me. Even to think of it made me uncom- 
fortable. So I tried to listen to the okusan as much 
as possible. But they, on their part, would never 
be satisfied with this, and were eager to know the 
circumstances of my own home, till finally I told 
them everything. When I said that I should never 
return to my native place again, and that if I return- 
ed at all, there was nothing but my parents’ grave, 
the okusan looked very much moved, and the girl 
cried. I felt that I had done a good thing by telling 
them, and I was glad. 

The okusan , who heard everything about my 
past, began to assume the attitude of one whose 
intuition had proved true. After that she began to 
treat me as if I were one of her young kinsmen. 
This did not annoy me, but rather pleased me. But 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 17? 

before long, my suspicion was aroused again. 

It was only a trifle that made me uneasy. But 
as those trifles were accumulated one by one, the 
root of my suspicion gradually grew. Quite sud- 
denly, I began to wonder whether the okusan was 
eager to make her daughter attached to me prompt- 
ed by the same motive as my uncle. Then the 
woman who looked kind suddenly appeared to me 
a cunning schemer. I bit my lips bitterly. 

The okusan had announced from the beginning 
that she was taking care of me because her family 
was small and lonely. I did not think it a lie. After 
I became intimate with her, and was told many of 
her private affairs, this still seemed true. But gene- 
rally their financial condition was not very prosper- 
ous. From the point of view of money, therefore, 
it would be of no disadvantage for them to be con- 
nected with me. 

I began to be on my guard again. But why 
should I assume this attitude, I who deeply loved 
the daughter as I told you ? What was the good of 
being suspicious of her mother ? I laughed at my- 
self. Sometimes I railed at myself, saying, “ Fool ! ” 
But if it had been all, 1 should never have been much 
tortured, fool though I was. I was agonized by the 
horrible doubt that the daughter was a schemer as 
well as the mother. As soon as I wondered if they 
two were planning everything behind my back, my 
pain became so great that I felt as if I could not bear 
it. I was not merely uneasy, but almost driven to 


178 


KOKORO 


desperation. Yet, I trusted the daughter firmly, and 
never doubted her. So I stood still between trust 
and delusion, not able to move at all. To me both 
my trust and delusion were at once the produces of 
my imagination and the reality. 

16 

I went to school as before. But I felt as if the 
professors’ voices were sounding from far away. It 
was the same with my work. The letters which 
came before my eyes disappeared like vapour, before 
they penetrated into the depth of my mind. Besides 
I became taciturn, which some of my friends, mis- 
understanding, interpreted as a sign of meditation. 
But I did not try to explain away this misunder- 
standing. Rather I was glad because happily they 
lent me a convenient mask. Y et sometimes perhap s 
I was not satisfied, and surprised them by suddenly 
assuming an attitude of hilarity. 

This house had very few visitors. They did 
not seem to have many relatives. Though the 
daughter’s class-mates came sometimes, they always 
left the house after talking with her in very low 
tones, so low that one wondered whether they were 
really talking. I never realized at all that this was 
because they were afraid of disturbing me. For 
there was no one among my friends who, coming 
to see me, felt constraint towards the family ; though 
we were never very rowdy. In this point, I, the 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 179 

paying guest, was like the master of the house, and 
the daughter, the owner of the house, was, as it 
were, put into the situation of a dependent. 

This I write only as I remember it, and not 
because it is important to my story. Yet there was 
one thing to which I could not be indifferent. 
Sometimes quite suddenly, I heard a man’s voice in 
the direction of the sitting-room or the daughter’s 
room. The voice, quite different from my friends’, 
was so low that I could not catch what he was talk- 
ing about. As it was more difficult to hear, it pro- 
duced a kind of excitement in me, till I became 
strangely nervous. First of all, I wondered whether 
he was their relative, or whether he was merely 
their acquaintance. Then I wondered whether he 
was young or middle-aged. But it was impossible 
for me to know such a thing by sitting in my room. 
Yet it was more difficult for me to go and see him, 
by opening the sliding-doors. My nerves, trembling, 
nay beating rather in huge waves, tortured me. 
After the visitor left, I always asked his name. The 
reply of the daughter and her mother, however, was 
very simple. But I had not courage enough to 
question further, though I could not hide my dis- 
satisfied look from them. Of course, I had no right 
to do that either. I let them see simultaneously my 
self-respedt which came from my education and 
prompted me to maintain my dignity, and my hungry 
look which actually betrayed it. They laughed, and 
I so lost my composure that there was no room left 


180 


KOKORO 


in my mind to judge at the time whether that 
laughter came from their goodwill, or was only their 
affectation of goodwill After all had passed, I said 
to myself over and over again that perhaps I was 
being fooled by them. 

I was quite free. I had no necessity to consult 
anyone, even if I wanted to leave school, and I could 
live where and in what way I liked, and marry any 
woman from any part of J apan. Many times, I made 
up my mind to be bold and ask the okusan to give 
me her daughter. But whenever I determined upon 
this course, I hesitated, and did not say a word 
about it. It was not because I feared to be refused. 
I did not know how my destiny would change if I 
were refused, but I was able to brace up my spirits 
by reflecting that such a refusal would give me a 
chance to survey the new world from a different 
standpoint. But I hated to be taken advantage of. 
It hurt me more than anything else to have others 
play a trick on me. I, who had been deceived by 
my uncle, made up my mind never to be victimized 
again. 

17 

As I was always buying books, the okusan ad- 
vised me to get some clothes as well. Indeed, all 
the kimonos that I had were made of country-woven 
cotton. Students in those days never wore silk. 
When one of my friends, the son of a merchant in 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 181 

Yokohama who lived quite luxuriously, received a 
package containing a silk undergarment, all laughed 
at it. He, quite ashamed, apologized profusely, and 
throwing the undergarment into the depth of his 
basket-trunk, would never use it. But his mischie- 
vous friends all gathered together, and forced him 
to wear it. Then, unfortunately, it happened that 
lice bred in it. Perhaps he regarded it as a piece of 
good luck, and folding the famous undergarment 
into a bundle, he threw it into the big ditch of 
Nezu, when he went for a walk in that direction. I, 
who was with him then, standing on the bridge, 
looked at him and laughed, without the slightest 
realization that it was wasteful to do such a thing. 

I had grown much older since then. But I 
had not sense enough to get a visiting kimono myself. 
I had a funny idea that it was not necessary for me 
to be worried about clothing, till the time came for 
me to graduate and grow a moustache. So I said 
to the okusan that kimonos were not necessary for 
me, though I needed books. The okusan, who knew 
how many books I used to buy, asked me whether 
1 read all of them. Sometimes I bought dictionaries, 
but some books were left in my book-cases with 
the pages uncut, when I ought to have read them. 
So I did not know what to say to her, and realized 
that if I bought things I did not need, it did not 
matter whether they were books or clothes. More- 
over, 1 wanted to give the girl an obi or a kimono 
that she would like, on the pretext of expressing 


182 


KOKORO 


my gratitude to the okusan and her daughter for 
their kindness to me. So I asked her to make 
purchases for me. 

The okusan, however, said that she was not 
going alone, but ordered me to accompany her. She 
wanted her daughter also to go with us. We, as 
students, were brought up in an atmosphere dif- 
ferent from that of the present day, and were not 
accustomed to go out with a young lady. In those 
days, I was more enslaved to customs than I am 
now, so it was after some hesitation that I made up 
my mind and went. 

The daughter was very much dressed up. Her 
face, which was naturally fair, she painted so thick 
that she was conspicuous in the streets, where pass- 
ers-by gazed at her. Those who looked at the girl 
were sure to turn their eyes and look at me, which 
was indeed rather embarrassing. 

We three went to Nihonbashi and finished our 
shopping. As we had difficulty in selecting what 
we wanted, it took longer than I had expedted. The 
okusan always took the trouble to call me, and ask 
my opinion. Often she put the cloth on her 
daughter’s shoulder, and asked me to look at it 
from a distance of two or three steps’ away. And 
I spoke out my opinion as if I were a grown-up who 
could appreciate such things, saying that this would 
never do, or that suited her very well. 

As we spent much time on this, it was supper- 
time when we left the shop. The okusan, saying that 


THE SENSEI AND ;HIS LAST LETTER 183 

she would treat me in acknowledgement of my 
present, took me to a narrow by- street where there 
was a story-teller’s hall called Kiharadana. The 
shop where we dined was as narrow as the by-street. 
I, who was completely ignorant of this neighbour- 
hood, was surprised at her rich information. 

We returned home rather late. The next day 
was Sunday, and I stayed in my room all day. On 
Monday morning as soon as I went to school, one 
of my class-mates made fun of me. He asked me 
in an affecfted manner when I had been married, 
and said that my wife was very beautiful. Probably 
he had seen me going to Nihonbashi with the 
ladies. 

18 

When I returned home, I told this to the oku- 
san and her daughter. The former laughed, and 
looking at me, added that I must have been uncom- 
fortable on hearing such things. At that moment, 
I wondered whether men were tempted to confess 
their minds by women in this way. The okusan’s 
eyes had meaning enough to make me think so. Per- 
haps it might have been better for me to avail my- 
self of that opportunity and confess frankly what I 
felt. But a lump of suspicion was even then stick- 
ing in my mind. I stopped suddenly just before I 
began to speak, and deliberately shifted the angle 
of conversation a little. 


184 


KOKORO 


I withdrew myself from the centre of the dis- 
cussion, and groped for the okusan’s intention about 
her daughter’s marriage. She told me distinctly 
that she had had two or three proposals of marriage, 
but as she was young, and had not yet left the high 
school, she was not in a great hurry. She seemed 
to be depending much upon her daughter’s beauty, 
though she said nothing. She even observed that 
she was not anxious about the girl because she could 
find a husband for her at any time. Another reason 
for her not being eager to part with her daughter 
easily was that she was the only child. What she 
said made me wonder if she was puzzled even about 
whether she should adopt a young man as her 
daughter’s husband. 

As I talked with her, I felt as if I had got a 
great deal of information. But the result was that 
I missed a chance of asking for her daughter’s hand. 
I could not speak a word about myself to the last. 
I tried to put an end to our talk and return to my 
room. 

As we were talking, the daughter, who had 
been with us a little while before and laughed over 
my story, saying, “ O dear ! How could he say such 
a thing ? ” went to the corner of the room and sat 
there with her back towards us. When I turned my 
head as I was just going to stand up, I saw her back. 
But we cannot read others’ feelings only by looking 
at their backs, and I could not make out her ideas 
on this question. She sat facing the closet which 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST JLETTER 185 

was opened about a foot, and seemed to have taken 
something out of it and to be looking at it on her 
lap. I found the piece-goods that we had bought 
two days before at the front of the closet. My 
kimono, as well as the daughter’s had been piled up 
in the corner of the same closet. 

As I turned to go in silence, the okusan, assum- 
ing all at once a serious tone, asked me what 1 was 
thinking. That question was so sudden that I could 
not understand its meaning unless I asked again 
what she meant. When it became clear that she 
meant to ask whether she had better get her 
daughter married early or not, I replied it would be 
better to be slow about it. She said she thought 
so too. 

While the relationship between the three of us 
was like this, it happened that another man came 
into this family. This event completely changed my 
destiny. If this man had not crossed the course of 
my life, perhaps there would have been no need to 
leave you such a long letter as this. I was, as it 
were, unaware of a devil which had been passing by 
me and of my whole life’s being darkened by the 
devil’s shadow cast on me at that moment. To tell 
you the truth, I myself brought him to this house. 
Of course, I had to ask the okuscin’s consent; so 
first of all, I confessed to her everything and asked 
her to take him. But she advised me not to do 
such a thing. , She had no clear reasons at all for 
disagreeing with me, while I had causes enough to 


186 


KOKORO 


bring him there. So 1 actually carried out what I 
thought best, in spite of the okusan’s unwillingness. 

19 

I shall call this friend’s name K. He had been 
my intimate friend since our childhood, so you will 
understand clearly without further explanation that 
we were from the same native place. He was the 
second son of a bonze of the Shinshu 1 sedt. Con- 
sequently he was adopted by a dodtor. The Hon- 
ganji 1 sedt had great power in the district where 
I was born, and the bonze of the Shinshu sedt seem- 
ed to be more well-to-do than those of other sedts. 
For instance, if the daughter of a bonze became of 
marriageable age, the supporters of the temple, 
finding a suitable man, would marry her. Of course, 
her father had no necessity to be worried about the 
wedding expenses, which were raised by those sup- 
porters. Therefore most of the families of the Shin- 
shu bonzes were prosperous. 

The family in which K was born was fairly 
well-to-do. But 1 don’t know whether they could 
have afforded for their second son to go up to Tokyo 
to study. Nor do 1 know whether they agreed to 
the proposal of K’s adoption because this meant the 
prospedt of his studying in Tokyo. At any rate, he 
was adopted by a doctor’s family, when we were 
still in the middle school. I remember even now 


1 The Shinshu sedt and the Honganji sedt are the same thing. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 187 

how surprised I was to find K’s surname suddenly 
changed when our teacher called the rolls. 

K’s adopted family, too, was fairly well-to-do. 
They supported him in Tokyo. We did not travel 
together, but as soon as he reached Tokyo, he came 
to live with me in the same boarding-house. In 
those days, two or three students often lived in one 
room, and K and I occupied the same room. Per- 
haps we were like captured beasts from a mountain 
embracing each other in a cage, glaring out of the 
cage at the same time. We two feared Tokyo and 
the people in Tokyo. Yet, in our six-mat room, 
we were talking about our ambitions as if we had 
been standing on the highest peak contemplating 
the whole world. 

But we were in earnest. We really intended 
to become great men. K was especially strong. 
He, who was born in a Buddhist family, was always 
using the word shojin , 1 and all his behaviour seemed 
to me to be rightly described by this word. Secretly 
I always venerated him. 

While he was still in the middle school, he 
puzzled me with difficult questions concerning re- 
ligion or philosophy. I don’t know whether this 
was due to his father’s influence over him or to the 
atmosphere belonging to his own home, which was 
a part of the temple. At any rate, his character 
seemed more bonze-like than that of ordinary bonzes. 


1 Word of Buddhistic origin meaning devotion. 


188 


KOKORO 


Now, the real intention of K’s adopted family in 
sending him to Tokyo was to make him a doctor. 
But obstinate as he was, he came up to Tokyo re- 
solved not to become a doctor. I rebuked him 
saying that he was, as it were, deceiving his foster- 
parents. In his boldness he replied that he was, 
adding that his behaviour was pardonable because 
he chose this in quest of the michi (way of truth). 
Perhaps this was not very clear even to him. Of 
course I don’t say that I could understand it. But 
in our youth this obscure word sounded noble. 
If it were not clear to me, yet his attitude of striving 
forward towards his ideal, inspired by his noble 
spirit, was free from all meanness, and I agreed with 
him. I don’t know how much he was assured by 
my consent. I think the single-minded K would 
have carried through what he thought best, however 
strongly I might have opposed him. But though I 
was yet a child, I knew quite well that, having en- 
couraged him, I should be more or less responsible 
for him, if something happened. Even if I had not 
realized this at that time, I agreed with him with 
such conviction that when it became necessary for 
me to look back to the past with the eyes of a 
grown-up I had to take my proper share of respon- 
sibility. 

20 : 

K and I entered the same department. With 


| 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 189 

the money sent by his adopted family, K began to 
walk the road of study which he liked, and did not 
seem to be troubled. I cannot explain his compo- 
sure except that he knew they would never find out 
what he was doing in Tokyo, and he would not care 
if it were known. K was calmer than I. 

When the first summer holidays came, he did 
not return to his home. He said he was going to 
study in a room of a certain temple in Komagome. 
It was at the beginning of September that I came 
back, and found him really shut up in a dirty temple 
near Ogannon. His was a narrow room next to the 
hondo, 1 but he seemed to be happy because he could 
study as he had planned. I think I perceived then 
that his life began to be more and more bonze-like. 
He had a rosary round his wrist. When I asked 
why he had such a thing, he pretended to count the 
beads one by one with his thumb. Every day he 
seemed to be counting them in this way over and 
over again. But its meaning was not clear to me. 
When we count the ring of beads one by one, we 
never come to an end. At which bead, and in 
what mood did K stop his fingers ? I often think 
of this, though it is only a trifle. 

Also I saw a Bible in his room. I had often 
heard the names of the Buddhist Scriptures from 
him, but we had never discussed Christianity, so 
I was surprised, and could not help asking him why. 


1 Main room for worship* 


190 


KOKORO 


He said there was no reason. He added that it was 
proper to try to read it, when it was a holy book 
and so dear to many people. Besides he said that 
he was intending to read the Koran sometime. He 
seemed to have great interest in the words, * Moham- 
med and the sword.’ 

In the second summer, urged by his family, he 
finally returned to his native place. But he seemed 
to be silent about his special subjedr. His family, 
too, did not discover it. Perhaps you, who have 
had the same education, know such circumstances 
as this. The world is surprisingly ignorant con- 
cerning the students’ lives and the school regula- 
tions. Things which are well known to us are not 
communicated to the outside world at all. We, for 
our part, breathing the air of the school nearly al- 
ways, are apt to think that everything concerning 
our school is surely known in the world. Perhaps 
K knew more about the world than I on such mat- 
ters and returned to Tokyo as calm as ever. We 
left our native place by the same train, so as soon 
as we got into the carriage, I asked him whether he 
had been in any trouble. He replied that nothing 
had happened during the vacation. 

The third summer was that memorable one 
when I made up my mind to leave for ever my native 
place where my parents’ grave lay. I advised K to 
return home, but he would not hear me. He asked 
me what was to be achieved by returning home 
every year. He seemed to be intending to study, 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 191 

f staying in Tokyo again. So I could not help decid- 
I ing to return alone. I told you before how eventful 
|| were the two months which I spent in my native 

; place, so I am not going to repeat it. Embracing 

{ discontent, melancholy, and lonely solitude in my 

heart, I saw K again in September, and found that 
something had been going wrong in his life, too. 
He had written to his adopted family himself and 
, confessed what he had done. He said he had re- 
solved to do this from the beginning. Perhaps he 
, had some hope of getting their permission to follow 
the course he had chosen as they could not change 
' what he had done. At any rate, he had no inten- 

j; tion of continuing to deceive his foster-parents after 

he entered the university. Perhaps he realized that 
even if he tried he could not succeed in deceiving 
them for long. 

21 

K’s adopted father was furious when he read 
K’s letter. At once he wrote to him severely, saying 
that he could never give money to one who was so 
; insolent as to deceive his parents. K showed me 

| that letter. Also he showed me another which he 

received soon after from his own family. In this 
too, there was as strong a reprimand as in the other. 
Perhaps the sense of obligation to the adopted family 
added to their anger ; they said they, too, would 
not take care of him at all. Whether K should 



192 


KOKORO 


return to his original family, or remain in his 
adopted family, and find some way of compromise, 
were questions for the future ; but the immediate 
problem was how to get money needful for his 
study. 

I asked K whether he had any idea about this 
question. He replied that he was intending to be- 
come a teacher at one of the night schools. In 
those days, it was easier to live in the world than 
it is now, so it was easier than you imagine to find 
private occupation for students. I thought that it 
would give him money enough to support himself. 
But I, for my part, felt my responsibility. It was I 
who agreed with him when he decided to follow 
the course that he liked, opposing his adopted 
family’s wish. Therefore, I could not take up the 
attitude of a looker-on, and let him do what he 
liked: so I immediately told him that I would help 
him financially. But K refused it at once. Pro- 
bably it seemed far more tolerable to one of his 
disposition that he should support himself than be 
protected by his friend. He said that he would 
never be called a man unless he could earn his 
own living, when he was already a university student. 
I could not bear to hurt his feelings to satisfy my 
sense of responsibility. So I let him do what he 
liked, and withdrew my hands from this problem. 

Soon K found a position which suited him. 
But it was only too easy to imagine how hard this 
occupation was to one who so valued time. He, 


! THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 193 

| however, rushed on his way, burdened with the new 
occupation, and never attempting to lessen the 
hours of private study. 1 was anxious about his 
health. But with his natural pluckiness, he only 
laughed, and would not pay any attention to my 
advice. 

At the same time, the relations between his 
adopted family and himself became more and more 
I complicated. He had no time to spare and so was 
deprived of the opportunities to talk with me; 
therefore I did not hear about the details to the 
last, but I knew that the settlement of this matter 
| was becoming more difficult. Also I knew that 

| somebody adted as arbitrator between K and his 

! adopted family. This man wrote to K, advising 

'> him to return to his native place, but he insisted 

i that the case was hopeless and did not follow this 

j advice. This obstinacy — K said he could not return 

j because it was the middle of the term, but he must 

■j have appeared stubborn in their eyes — seemed to 

have made the matter worse. His original family, 
1 too, began to look on him with anger. I was anx- 
ious, and hoping to soothe their feelings, I wrote 
to them ; it was no use. My letter was utterly dis- 
regarded, and I did not get even the briefest answer. 
I was mortified, and though 1 had been on K’s side 
from the beginning, I now made up my mind to be 
; K’s friend, no matter what happened. 

[ Finally, it was settled that K should return to 

l his original family, and that the amount spent on 


194 


KOKORO 


his education by his adopted family should be re- 
paid by his father. But his original family said 
that they would not help him any more, but he 
could do what he liked. To use the old saying, he 
was cut off with a shilling. Perhaps they did not 
feel quite so strongly as this, but K himself inter- 
preted it as such. K had no mother. I am sure 
one side of his character could be considered as the 
result of his being brought up by a step-mother. I 
think if his own mother had been alive, the relations 
between him and his family might have been closer. 
K’s father was of course a bonze, but 1 wonder if 
he were not more like a samurai, 1 because he was 
so upright. 

22 

After K’s affairs were settled, I received a long 
letter from his sister’s husband. K told me that 
as K’s adopted family was related to this man, his 
views were held important both when K had been 
adopted and when he was returned to his original 
family. 

In the letter, the man asked me to let him 
know how K was faring after the event. He added 
that he would be much obliged if I answered him 
as soon as I could, because K’s sister was anxious 
about him. K liked this married sister better than 


1 Warrior, 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


195 


his brother, who had inherited the temple. Though 
they were all born from the same mother, she was 
much older than he. So, in his childhood, perhaps 
this sister seemed to him more of a mother than 
his step-mother. 

I showed K the letter. He said nothing, but 
he confessed that he had two or three letters from 
his sister which said the same thing. He said that 
whenever he heard from his sister, he answered that 
there was no need for her to worry about him. 
Unfortunately this sister married a man whose 
family was in rather straitened circumstances, so she 
could not help him financially, however sympathetic 
she might be. 

I answered his brother-in-law in the same way 
as K had answered his sister. I said very firmly 
that they should be assured as I would do my best 
for him if anything happened to him. Of course K 
knew nothing about this. I felt kindly toward K’s 
sister, who was much worried about her brother’s 
future, but at the same time I was prompted by my 
anger toward the others who could not but be 
regarded as holding me in contempt. 

We were in the first year at the university 
when K returned to his original family. For a year 
and a half, he supported himself without the aid of 
anybody. But overwork seemed to affed: his health 
and his spirit. Of course the complicated problem 
of his returning to his original family having been 
added to it, he became more and more morbid. 


196 


KOKORO 


Sometimes he spoke as if he alone were loaded with 
the misfortunes of the world, and was excited if I 
denied it. Besides he was worried, feeling as if the 
light which lay in his future was gradually receding 
from his eyes. At the beginning of our study, we 
all start the new voyage with great expectations, but 
as the time of graduation approaches we realize how 
slow our steps are, and more than half of us are 
sure to be disappointed then. It was thus with K, 
but he was far more impatient than the ordinary 
students. In the end I thought it best to calm his 
mood. 

I advised him to give up his private occupation, 
adding that he had better decrease his burden and 
enjoy himself in preparation for his great future. I 
had feared that the obstinate K would not listen to 
me easily, but it was adtually even more difficult 
than I had expected. This troubled me. K insisted 
that studying was not his only purpose. He said 
he wanted to become a strong man by nurturing 
the power of his will, and concluded that in order 
to do this, he must experience hardships. From 
the ordinary man’s point of view, he seemed almost 
mad. Added to this, in spite of his ascetic way of 
living, his will was adtually becoming weaker. His 
nerves were almost in a state of collapse. There 
was no other way for me but to agree, till I an- 
nounced that I, too, was intending to walk the road 
of life in the same spirit. (This was not entirely 
false. He had so much force of character that when 


i THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER W? 

] I listened to his opinion, I was gradually made to 
feel just as he did.) Then at last I said to him that 
I wanted to live with him so that we might walk 
the way of progress together. I went so far as to 
kneel before him, in order to bend his stubbornness, 
and finally brought him to our house. 

i 23 

My room had attached to it a four-mat ante- 
room, which we had to pass through when we came 
from the entrance. Though this ante-room was 
very inconvenient, this was to be for K’s use. At 
first I thought of putting K’s desk beside mine in 
my eight-mat room, so that we could use both 
rooms together. But K, saying that he preferred 
to have his own room even if it were small, chose 
that small room himself. 

i As I told you before, the okusan did not agree 

I with this arrangement at first. She said that if her 
. house were an ordinary boarding-house, it would be 
j more convenient to have two people instead of one, 

| and more advantageous to have three instead of two, 
but as she was not doing this as her profession, I 
had better give up this idea if I could. When I said 
that he would never give her any trouble, nor make 
: her busier, she replied that she did not like to live 

j with a stranger whose character was unknown to 
her. When I rebuked her, saying that she knew 
j little of me when I came, she apologized profusely. 


198 


KOKORO 


telling me that she could judge my character from the 
beginning. I laughed bitterly. Then the okusan 
changed the course of her reasoning, and said that 
it was not good for me to bring such a man. When 
I asked her why, it was her turn to smile bitterly. 

To tell you the truth, there was no necessity 
for me to live with K at all. But 1 was afraid that 
he would hesitate to accept my help every month, 
if I offered it in the shape of money ; his sense of 
independence was so strong. So I tried to let him 
live in our house, and secretly handed the okusan 
the payment for our food though he was not aware 
of it. But I had no intention of confessing a word 
to the okusan about K’s finances. 

I only told her about his health. Also I said 
that he would become more and more perverse if I 
left him alone. I added an account of his trouble 
with his adopted family and of his separation from 
his original family. I told them I was going to 
bring K there, with the resolution of one who was 
holding a half-drowned man close to his bosom to 
give him the warmth of his own body. I asked 
both the okusan and her daughter to take care of 
him kindly, bearing this in mind. It was by this 
confession that I persuaded the okusan at last. But 
K, who heard nothing from me, was ignorant of all 
this. This satisfied me all the more, and I greeted 
K, who moved to our house, looking as if nothing 
had happened before he came. 

The okusan and her daughter kindly helped him 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 199 

to unpack and arrange his things. I was pleased 
interpreting this as due to their friendship for my- 
self, though K retained his unsociable manner. 

When I asked him whether he liked his new 
residence, he simply replied that it was not bad. 
From my point of view, it was more than that. He 
had left a dirty musty room facing the north. The 
food was as poor as the room. The difference was 
something like that of a bird coming out of a deep 
valley and nestling in a high tree. His attitude of 
concealing his real feelings at this change came from 
his stubbornness, but also partly from his philo- 
sophy of life. Brought up in the Buddhist dodtrines, 
he considered it immoral to say anything about 
living, food, or clothes, and having read the lives of 
the bonzes and saints of old days, he was apt to 
separate the spirit from the body. Perhaps some- 
times he felt as if the spirit increased its brightness 
by torturing the flesh. 

I tried as much as possible not to oppose him. 
I planned to melt the ice in the sun. I was sure 
that time would come for him to get self-know- 
ledge, if he melted and became water. 

24 

That was the manner in which the okusan had 
treated me, and as the result of which I had gradual- 
ly become cheerful. Realizing this, I tried to apply 
the same method to K. 1, who had been his friend 


200 


KOKORO 


for a long time, knew quite well that K and I were 
very different in our dispositions, but I thought that 
as my nerves had more or less recovered since I had 
come to live in this family, K’s mind and heart too 
would some day be calmed in this house. 

K had a stronger resolution than I. I think he 
worked about twice as much as I did. Besides he 
was born with a far better intellect than mine. I 
cannot judge from our university work, as we dif- 
fered in our special subjects, but both in the middle 
school and the high school while we were in the 
same class, K was always ahead. I always felt that 
I could not surpass him in anything. But when I 
forced him to come to our house, I believed that I 
had more reason and common sense than he. As 
I saw it, he did not seem to understand the dif- 
ference between super-endurance and patience. I 
want to add this especially for you, so please listen 
to me attentively. All our faculties, both physical 
and spiritual, are developed or destroyed according 
to the stimuli given from the outside. But as in 
both cases it is of course necessary for the stimuli 
to be increased gradually, it is to be feared that with- 
out great care a man may be unaware how his 
strength is weakening, and so may be even those 
who observe him. A doctor explains that there is 
nothing idler than the stomach. When we eat 
kayu 1 all the time, we lose our power to digest any- 


1 A kind of porridge made of rice. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 201 

thing harder. So he says we must try to eat a 
variety of things. But 1 think we cannot explain 
this by the simple fadt that our stomachs become 
accustomed to such food. It must mean that by 
the gradual increase of stimuli, the digestive faculties 
become stronger. We can easily understand this 
by imagining what would happen if, on the contrary, 
our stomachs should become gradually weaker. 
Though he was a greater man than I, K did not 
notice this point at all. He seemed to have been 
sure that if he became accustomed to the difficulties, 
they would become more bearable to him, till they 
would not trouble him at all. He seemed to have 
believed absolutely that the more hardships he ex- 
perienced the sooner he would reach the state of 
not being troubled by them, because his repeated 
experience would inure him. 

When I persuaded him, 1 was anxious to make 
this clear to him. But I knew it was useless to 
argue. I thought he would be certain to refer to 
the great men of old, and then I should have to 
explain that there was a great difference between 
him and those sages. If he would accept this, it 
would be all right. But he would never give in, 
when our discussions reached this point. He would 
step forward, and try to actualize what he said by 
his behaviour. In this point, he was terrible, and 
great. He would go on to destroy himself. If one 
judged from results, he was great only in power of 
destroying his own success; but he was not an or- 


1 



202 


KOKORO 


dinary man. I, who knew his disposition well, 
could, after all, say nothing to him. Besides, in my 
opinion, he appeared to be suffering from nervous 
strain. Even if I managed to convince him, he was 
bound to become excited. Though I was not afraid 
of quarrelling with him, when I looked back upon 
my past tortured by solitude, I could not bear to 
put my best friend in the same solitary situation. 
Further, I did not like to throw him into greater 
perplexity. So after he moved to our house, I did 
not say anything critical for the time. I decided 
to watch gently the effect of his surroundings upon 
him. 

25 

When K was not there, I asked the okusan and 
her daughter to talk with him as much as possible, 
because I was sure that his past life of silence had 
affected him. I could not think but that his mind 
had become rusty, like unused iron. 

The okusan laughed, saying that he was a man 
with whom one never knew how to become friendly. 
The daughter took the trouble to explain this com- 
ment by illustration. When she asked him whether 
there was any glowing charcoal in his brazier, he 
replied that there were none. When she said she 
would bring some, he said he did not need them. 
Then she asked whether he was cold, he replied 
that he was, but that he did not need them ; then 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 203 

he plunged back into silence. It was not enough 
for me to smile bitterly ; I had to say something to 
express my regret and apologize for him. It was 
spring then, so it was not necessary for us to have 
the brazier all the time, but 1 felt that their com- 
ments had been reasonable if he behaved like this. 

I tried to establish normal intercourse between 
K and the ladies by making myself the centre of the 
circle. I tried to make them intimate by adopting 
different ways suitable for every occasion, some- 
times inviting the ladies into the room where K 
and I were talking, or calling K when they and I 
were in the same room. Of course K did not like 
this. At one time, he stood up suddenly and left 
the room ; at another time he would not leave his 
own room, though 1 called him again and again. 
K asked me how I could enjoy such idle conversa- 
tion. I only smiled, but I could understand quite 
well that K was holding me in contempt for this. 

In some way, I might be really worth his con- 
tempt. One may say that K’s ideal was far higher 
than mine. I, too, do not deny this. But he was, 
as it were, a deformed person, because other things 
in him did not conform to his ideal. I thought it 
was best to try to make him human, above all things. 
I found that however full his head might be with 
the images of great men, it would be no use unless 
he himself became great. I planned to make him 
sit beside the women as the first step toward making 
him human. I attempted to expose him to the 


204 


KOKORO 


feminine atmosphere, and then renew his blood 
which was beginning to rust. 

This attempt gradually succeeded. Those who 
looked incompatible at first gradually began to unite. 
He seemed to realize little by little that there existed 
a world outside himself. One day he said to me 
that women were not so contemptible after all. K 
seemed to have been requiring from them the same 
knowledge and learning as I had, and to have felt 
contempt as soon as he foiind out that this was 
hopeless. He had been judging all men and women 
by the same standards, without realizing that he 
had to change his point of view according to their 
sex. I said to him that if he and I only were to 
talk and exchange thoughts for ever, we should 
grow only as two straight lines. He replied that he 
quite agreed with me. In those days, I was more 
or less absorbed in my love for the daughter, so 
perhaps such an expression as this was natural for 
me. But I did not confess a word to him about my 
inner feelings. 

It was most pleasant for me to see K’s mind, 
which had been, as it were, walled in by books, 
becoming gradually more and more friendly. As I 
started this plan inspired by that purpose from the 
beginning, I could not help feeling the pleasure 
which accompanied my success. Instead of remark- 
ing on this to him, I told the okusan and the girl 
what I thought. They, too, looked satisfied. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


205 


26 

Though K and I were in the same department, 
our special subjects were different, so the time for 
our going to school and returning home was not 
always the same. When I came back earlier than 
he, I only passed through his empty room, but if I 
was later, I used to enter my room greeting him in 
a friendly manner. K would look from his book, 
and glance at me as 1 was opening the sliding-door. 
He was sure to say, “ Have you just come back ? ” 
Sometimes I only nodded, saying nothing, but 
sometimes I passed his room simply replying, 
“Yes.” 

One day I had some business in Kanda, and 
came back much later than usual. I walked quickly 
to the gate, and opened the entrance-door with a 
rattling sound, when 1 heard the daughter’s voice. 
Certainly it seemed to come from K’s room. If you 
went straight from the entrance-hall, passing the 
corridor beside the sitting-room and the daughter’s 
room, and turned to the left, you would find K’s 
room and mine, so I, who had stayed in the house 
for a long time, could well discern where the voice 
came from. I shut the entrance-door at once. Then 
the daughter’s voice, too, stopped. While I was 
taking off my boots — even in those days I used lace 
boots which were at once chic and troublesome to 
put on — no voice was heard from K’s room. I 
wondered, and thought that it might have been my 


206 


KOKORO 


mistake. But when I opened the sliding-door, to 
pass through K’s room, the two were sitting there. 
K said as usual, “ Have you just come back ? ” The 
daughter, too, greeted me as she sat, saying, “ O 
here you are.” That simple greeting seemed to me 
a little formal. It sounded in my ear as a tone 
from which naturalness had disappeared. I asked 
her about the okusan. There was no meaning in 
my question. I asked just because the house was 
more quiet than ever. 

The okusan was out, as I thought. The maid, 
too, had gone with her. So K and the daughter 
had been alone in the house. I inclined my head 
a little. During the long time that I lived with 
them, the okusan had never gone out, leaving the 
daughter and myself alone, so I asked if something 
urgent had happened. She only laughed. I did 
not like women who laughed at such a time. Of 
course this is common with young girls, and the 
daughter, too, was apt to laugh at a trifle. But 
perceiving my expression, she returned to her usual 
countenance, and answered gravely that though it 
was not urgent, her mother was obliged to go out 
on business. I, the paying guest, had no right to 
question further. So I was silent. 

As soon as I had changed my dress and was 
sitting at my desk, the okusan came back with the 
maid. Then the time came for us to meet at the 
dinner table. When I first came to live with them, 
I was treated as a guest in every way, so the maid 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 207 

brought my meals to me. But we had gradually 
changed our custom, 1 knew not when, and I was 
now accustomed to being called in to the sitting- 
room for meals. When K moved here, I asked them 
to treat him as they did me, and gave the okusan a 
slender table made of thin boards with legs which 
could be folded. A table like this is used every- 
where now, but in those days, there were almost no 
families that took their meals around such a table. 
I had taken the trouble to go to a shop of house- 
hold furniture in Ochanomizu and order it to be 
made as I planned. 

At that table, the okusan explained to me that 
as the fish-man did not come at the usual time, she 
had to go to buy something to give us at supper. 
When 1 understood that it was natural for them to 
do such a thing with guests in their house, the 
daughter looked at me and began to laugh again. 
But this time she stopped at once, when her mother 
reproved her. 

27 

A week later, I passed through the room where 
K and the daughter were again talking together. 
As soon as she saw my face, she began to laugh. 
Perhaps it would have been better if I had asked 
her what she was laughing about, but I went to my 
room in silence. So K could not ask me his usual 
“ Have you just come back ? ” The daughter seemed 


208 


KOKORO 


to open the shoji 1 at once, and enter the sitting-room. 

At dinner, the daughter said that I was a funny- 
man. This time, too, I did not ask her why. Only 
I noticed that the okusan directed her eyes toward 
the girl as if she were reproving her with them. 

After supper, I took K with me for a walk. ' We 
passed through the street of the Botanical Garden 
from the back of Denzuin, and came again to the 
bottom of Tomisaka. It was not a short walk, but 
during the time we said very little. From the point 
of view of disposition, K was more taciturn than I. 
I, too, was not talkative. But as I walked, I tried 
to speak to him as much as I could. My questions 
were chiefly concerning the family in which we lived. 
I wanted to know K’s opinion about the okusan and 
her daughter. But all his answers were so vague that 
I could not decide whether he was “ in the sea or 
on the mountain”. Besides, they were very simple, 
though they were not to the point. He seemed to 
be caring more for his special subject than the two 
women. But as it was just before the examinations 
at the end of the second year, perhaps he was more 
studious than I, when looked at from the ordinary 
point of view. Besides, he discussed Swedenborg, 
and surprised me, for I did not know of such a man. 

When we passed our examinations, the okusan 
was pleased, saying that we two were going to gradu- 
ate after one more year. Her daughter, too, who 


1 Paper sliding-door, sometimes with a pane of glass in the middle. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 209 

could be regarded as her only pride, would leave 
her school before long. K observed to me that a 
girl left school knowing nothing. K seemed to be 
disregarding sewing, the koto playing, and the flower 
arrangement that she was practising besides her 
studies. I laughed at his carelessness, and repeated 
my old argument that the value of women did not 
lie in great learning. He did not oppose me. But 
he did not appear to agree with me. To me, this 
was pleasant, because he seemed to be thinking 
little of the girl whom I regarded as the prototype 
of women. When I look back, I find that my jeal- 
ousy toward him had already sprung up at that 
time. 

I consulted him about the place where we should 
go in the summer holidays. K expressed his un- 
willingness to go. Of course he was not financially 
able to go anywhere he liked, but he could go any- 
where if I asked him. I asked him why he did not 
want to go. He said there was no reason, and that 
it was more agreeable for him to read books at home. 
When I persisted that it was better for our health 
to go to a summer resort and study in that cool 
place, he said I had better go myself. But I could 
not leave K here alone. I was not very comfortable 
to see K and the family becoming more and more in- 
timate. I cannot say anything if somebody asks 
me why I was displeased with the realization of my 
first hope. I must be a fool. The okusan, who 
could not bear to hear our endless discussions, came 


210 


KOKORO 


between us. Finally it was decided that we were to 
go to Boshu together. 

28 

K had not travelled much. For me, too, it was 
the first visit to Boshu. We, knowing nothing, 
landed at the place where the ship stopped for the 
first time. I remember it was certainly the place 
called Hota. I don’t know whether it is much 
different now, but in those days it was quite a miser- 
able fishing port. First of all the smell of fish 
pervaded everything. As soon as we went into the 
water the skin of our hands and legs was rubbed 
off as we were thrown about by the waves, for big 
stones, as large as our fists, were always tumbled 
about by the rushing waves. 

Soon I became tired of the place. But K did 
not say whether he liked it or not. At least his 
look was calm, though he always came back bruised 
whenever he bathed. Finally I persuaded him, and 
we went to Tomiura. Then we moved from Tomi- 
ura to Nako. In those days, all the places on this 
coast were chiefly summer resorts for students, so 
everywhere we found bathing-places suitable for us. 
K and I often sat on the rocks on the beach, look- 
ing at the colour of the sea far away and the sea- 
bottom near us. The water, seen from the rocks, 
was exceedingly pretty. We could point at the small 
fish, variously coloured, red, deep blue, and colours 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


211 


which we could not see in the fish sold in the 
market, swimming to and fro in the transparent 
waves. 

I often opened my books on those rocks. But 
mostly K sat there in silence, without doing any- 
thing. I could not understand at all whether he 
was musing, or absorbed in the scenery, or thinking 
at random. Sometimes I looked up, and asked him 
what he was doing. K always replied simply that 
he was doing nothing. Often I imagined how happy 
I should have been if the one who sat still beside 
me had been the daughter instead of K. What was 
more, suddenly I began to wonder whether K, too, 
was sitting with the same desire as mine, and all at 
once, I hated to sit there calmly with my book. 
When I felt like this I always stood up at once, and 
cried out in an unreserved, loud voice. 1 became 
so wild that it was impossible for me to recite or 
sing poems or songs, but I only cried out as if I were 
a savage. At one time I suddenly snatched at the 
nape of K’s neck from behind, and asked him what 
he would do if I threw him into the sea. K did 
not move, and replied, “Do. It is just what I 
should like,” without turning his head. Then I let 
go his neck at once. 

i At that time, K seemed to have almost re- 

covered from his nervous state. But on the con- 
trary, I became more and more nervy. Looking at 
K who was calmer than I, I envied him, and at the 

. same time I hated him, because he seemed to be 

I 




212 KOKORO 

indifferent to me. This attitude of his appeared to 
me as a sort of self-confidence. But if I found that 
self-confidence in him, I could never be satisfied. 
My doubt pushed itself forward, and wanted to 
make clear its quality. Was he feeling as if he had 
regained the light in his future for his study or his 
work? If that was all, there was no reason why 
K’s interest and mine should collide. I should be 
all the happier, because my pains taken on his ac- 
count had been rewarded. But if his satisfaction 
came from the daughter, I could never forgive him. 
Strangely enough he seemed to be utterly unaware 
of my inclination toward the daughter. Of course 
I did not behave in a way to make him understand 
it, and he was naturally not sharp at comprehending 
a thing like this. From the beginning I felt certain 
that there was nothing to fear from K on this 
score, so I took the trouble to bring him to our 
house. 

29 

I finally made up my mind to confess my feel- 
ing to K. This was not the first time I had taken 
such a resolution. I had thought of it before leav- 
ing Tokyo, but I was not skilful enough either to 
find or to make an opportunity. When I think of 
this now, I am impressed by the artificiality of the 
men who surrounded me. There was not one who 
could talk naturally about anything where woman 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 213 

was concerned. Perhaps many of them had nothing 
to tell, but even those who had were silent. You, 
who have been brought up in the comparatively 
free atmosphere of today, would certainly find this 
strange. I will leave it to your understanding to 
judge whether it was the remnant of Confucianism, 
or a sort of shyness. 

K and I were friends who could talk about 
everything. On rare occasions we talked about 
love, but it always ended in abstract reasoning. 
Besides, this was very rare. Most of our talks were 
about books, learning, the work we were going to 
do in the future, our expectations, and our culture. 
However intimate we had been, we were so imper- 
sonal that I could not change the tone of our con- 
versations suddenly. We two were as intimate as 
we were awkward. After I made up my mind to 
confess my feelings for the daughter, how many 
times was I troubled by impatient uneasiness! 1 
wanted to break some part of his head, and pour 
some fresh air into it. 

The thing which would seem quite ridiculous 
to you was indeed a great difficulty for me in those 
days. I was a coward while we were on this trip as 
well as when we were at home. Though I was always 
observing him to seize an opportunity, I could not 
do anything about his strangely high and oppress- 
ive attitude. From my point of view, his heart was, 
as it were, thickly covered with black lacquer. All 
the blood that I was going to pour was repelled, 


214 


KOKORO 


not even a drop of it ever getting into that heart. 

At one time, I felt rather reassured, K’s manner 
being so strong and noble. I secretly repented of 
my suspicion, and at the same time, I asked his 
pardon in my mind. So doing, suddenly I felt 
uncomfortable, as I myself appeared so base. But 
after a while, the former suspicion came back again, 
and attacked me with strong force. As everything 
had a doubt for its starting-point, everything was 
disadvantageous to me. As far as personal ap- 
pearance went, K seemed to be more liked by women 
than I. As for our dispositions he seemed to at- 
tract women more, because he was less sensitive 
than I. In some things he was stupid, yet there 
was a trustworthy manliness about his character, 
which seemed to be more to his advantage. From 
the point of view of learning, of course I realized 
that I was not even his rival, though our special 
subjects were different. — Thus when only his strong 
points began to appear in my eyes all at once, I, who 
felt a little assured, reverted to my old uneasy doubts 
again. 

Perceiving my restless manner, K suggested 
that if I did not like it at the seaside, he would 
return to Tokyo with me. But at these words, I 
suddenly became inclined to remain. Perhaps I did 
not want K to return to Tokyo really. We two 
went round the south end of the peninsula, and 
came to the other side of it. Tortured in the heat 
of the sun, we walked on, deceived by the people 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 215 

of Kazusa who always replied to our question that 
our destination lay within two miles. I could not 
understand why we were walking like this. I told 
him so, half jesting. Then K replied that he was 
walking because he had two legs. When he felt 
hot, he said we would swim in the sea, and we 
bathed in whatever place we happened to be. After 
that, the sun shone upon us again, till our bodies 
became quite heavy and weary. 

30 

As we walked along like this, we naturally 
became more and more affected by heat and fatigue. 
But this was different from illness. I felt all at 
once as if my spirit had moved to another’s body. 
As I talked to K as usual, I felt somewhere in my 
mind that I was not my usual self. My intimacy 
as well as my hatred toward him began to have a 
special quality, by which 1 felt as if these feelings 
toward him would only last during this trip. In a 
word, perhaps we two could form a new relation- 
ship by the heat, the sea, and our walk, quite dif- 
ferent from the usual one. We at that time were 
like two pedlars who had come to be fellow-travel- 
lers. Contrary to our earlier custom, we did not 
touch complicated questions which would require 
brain-work, however much we talked. 

v In this state, we went up to Choshi, but there 
is one occurrence during this trip that I never cab 


216 


KOKORO 


forget. Before we left Boshu, we saw Tainoura 1 in 
the place called Kominato. Many years have passed 
since that time, and moreover I was not particularly 
interested in it, so I don’t remember exactly, but it 
was said to be Nichiren’s 2 native village. They said 
that on the day of his birth two sea-breams were 
thrown upon the shore. Ever since that time, the 
fishermen did not dare to catch sea-breams, so there 
were a great many of them in the bay. We hired 
a boat, and took the trouble to have a look at the 
fish. 

In those minutes on the sea, I looked only at 
the waves, never tired, watching one of those in- 
teresting phenomena — the multitudes of the fish 
moving like a purplish cloud in the sea. But K did 
not seem to take the same interest in them as I did. 
He seemed to be imagining Nichiren rather than 
the sea-breams. There was a temple called Tan- 
joji 3 there. Perhaps they named it so because it 
was in the village where Nichiren was born. It was 
a fine temple. K suggested that he should visit it 
and talk to the bonze in charge. To tell you the 
truth, we were quite strangely dressed, especially K 
who wore a sedge hat in place of his own which had 
fallen into the sea. We both wore dirty, ill-smell- 
ing clothes. For this reason I said that we had 
better not visit a bonze. But with his usual obsti- 


1 Bay of Sea-breams* 

2 A famous saint who initiated one special se<it of Buddhism. 

3 Temple of Birth. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 217 

nacy, he refused to listen to me, and said that if I 
did not like to go I should wait outside the temple. 
Not knowing what to do, I came to the entrance 
with him, but I was sure that we should be refused. 
But the bonze was more polite than I had expedted, 
and showing us into a fine vast room, interviewed 
us at once. In those days, my ideas were very 
different from K’s, so I was not very much inclined 
to listen to his conversation with the bonze, but 
K seemed to be asking many questions about Nichi- 
ren. I remember even now that, when the bonze 
said that Nichiren was so skilful at writing letters 
in a cursive style that he was called the cursive 
Nichiren, K, who was not good at writing, looked 
disappointed. Perhaps K wanted to know Nichi- 
ren’s deeper self, and not such a superficial detail. 
I wonder whether the bonze satisfied him in that 
point, but at any rate he began to talk about Nichi- 
ren as we left the temple-yard. I was too hot and 
tired to talk about such a thing, so I was only talk- 
ing mechanically, without serious thought. But as 
even such a remark as this was troublesome to me, 
I finally collapsed into silence. 

I am sure it was the night after that we two, 
reaching an inn, had supper, and just before going 
to bed, began all at once to discuss difficult ques- 
tions. K was displeased with my indifference to 
Nichiren when he had been talking about him. He 
attacked me, saying that those who had no idea of 
spiritual progress were foolish, as if I had been such 


218 


KJOKORO 


a shallow man. As for me, as there was a lump in 
my bosom concerning the daughter, I could not 
accept with a smile his words which were verging 
on contempt. I, for my part, began to apologize. 

31 

At that time, I often used the word human. K 
said that I was hiding all my weakness in this word. 
Indeed, when I thought of this later, it was just as 
K had said. But I, who began to use that word in 
order to make him understand the meaning of being 
inhuman, was already rebellious from the start, so 
there was no room in my mind to examine myself 
again. I insisted on my own opinion all the more. 
Then K asked me in what point he was inhuman. 
I told him that he was human, or rather he might 
be too human, but in his speech and behaviour he 
assumed the attitude of a superhuman. 

When I said this, all that he replied was that 
as his moral training was not enough, he might 
seem thus in others’ eyes, never attempting to con- 
tradict me. I felt sorry for him, rather than disap- 
pointed. I stopped the argument at once. His 
tone, too, gradually sank. He looked sad, saying 
that if I knew men of the old days as well as he 
did, I should never attack him in this way. The 
men of the old days about whom he spoke were 
of course neither heroes nor great men, but those 
ascetics who tortured the flesh for the spirit, or 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 219 

afflicted the body for the truth. K said clearly 
that he was very sorry because I did not understand 
how much he was suffering from it. 

Then K and I went to sleep. The next day 
onwards, we returned to our usual attitude of 
pedlars, and began to walk, groaning and perspir- 
ing. But on the way, I often remembered our talk 
that night. The sense of remorse blazed up in my 
mind, as I thought how I had not seized the best 
opportunity offered to me, pretending I had nothing 
in my mind. I began to think it would have been 
better for me to confess the direct and simple truth 
instead of using such an abstract word as human. 
To tell you the truth, my adoption of such a word 
was founded on my feelings toward the daughter, so 
perhaps it had been more advantageous to me to 
expose everything as it was before his eyes than to 
blow into his ears reasonings made by the distilla- 
tion of the reality. I confess that the reason why 
I could not do this was because 1 had not courage 
enough to dare to break down the habit which ex- 
isted between us, whose intimacy was founded on 
the intercourse of learning. It might be the same 
if I said that I was too affected, or that I was cursed 
by my vanity, but the meaning of affectation or 
vanity that I mention here is a little different from 
what is usually implied. If that is clear to you, I 
am satisfied. 

We returned to Tokyo, sun-burnt. When I 
reached Tokyo, my feelings were different. There 


220 


KOKORO 


was almost no argument remaining in my mind, the 
argument of human, or inhuman. In K, too, not a 
glimpse of the manner of a religious enthusiast re- 
mained. Perhaps the questions of spirit and flesh 
did not exist in his mind. With an appearance of 
men belonging to a different race from those around 
us, we two looked about Tokyo, which seemed to 
be busy. Then we came to Ryogoku, and ate 
cochin-china fowl, though it was so hot. K pro- 
posed that we should walk to Koishikawa, strength- 
ened by the meal. In physical strength, I surpassed 
K, so I consented to it at once. 

When we reached home, the okusan was sur- 
prised. We were not only browned, but we had 
become thin, as we had walked immoderately. Yet 
the okusan praised us saying that we looked strong. 
The daughter began to laugh again, pointing out 
the okusan’s funny contradiction. I, who had often 
felt angry before my trip, was pleased with her 
laughter that time. Perhaps because it was on such 
an occasion, and because I heard it after a long time. 

What was more, I noticed that the daughter’s 
attitude had changed a little. We, who had come 
home after a long trip, needed a woman’s overhaul- 
ing before we could return to our normal routine, 
and the daughter, not to speak of the okusan, seemed 
to take care of my affairs first, postponing K’s. If 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 221 

she had been too candid, I might have been troubled, 
and on some occasions, I might have felt rather 
uncomfortable, but the daughter’s behaviour was 
quite to the point, so I was pleased. In other words, 
the daughter showed her characteristic kindness to 
me more than she did to him, in a manner that I 
only could understand. K did not seem to notice 
this, and did not look displeased. I uttered a song 
of triumph over him secretly in my heart. 

Soon the summer being over, we had to go to 
school in the middle of September. Because of our 
different time-tables the times of K’s and my going 
to school and returning home began to be different. 
About three times a week I returned home later 
than K, but whenever I returned I never found the 
daughter in K’s room. K, casting his usual glance 
at me, repeated his “Have you just come back 1 ” 
regularly. My greeting was simple and meaningless 
like a machine. 

I remember it was in the middle of October. 
I happened to get up late, and went to school in a 
hurry, without changing my kimono. To save time, 
I ran out of the house in zori . 1 That day, I was to 
return home earlier than K. When I reached home, 
and bearing that in mind, opened the entrance-door 
with a rattling sound, I heard K’s voice. At the 
same time the daughter’s laughter sounded in my 
ears. As I had not my troublesome lace boots on 


1 A kind of sandals. 


222 


KOKORO 


as usual, I stepped into the entrance and opened 
the sliding-door. I saw K sitting at his desk as 
usual. But the daughter had already disappeared. 
I caught only a glimpse of her back leaving K’s 
room as if she were running away. I asked K why 
he had come back early. K replied that he did 
not go to school because he was not quite well. 
As soon as I entered my room and sat there, the 
daughter came bringing tea. It was at that time 
that she greeted me for the first time. I was not 
the kind of man to ask her smilingly why she had 
run away before. Yet I was troubled somewhere in 
my mind by this. The girl stood up at once and 
went away from the corridor. But she stopped in 
front of K’s room, and spoke a word or two to him. 
They seemed to be finishing their talk of a little 
while before, but I, who was not with them, could 
not understand it at all. 

Then the daughter’s attitude gradually became 
less reserved. Even when both K and I were at 
home, she often came to the corridor in front of 
K’s room and called his name, and entering his 
room, stayed there. Of course sometimes she came 
with letters, and sometimes with laundry, so such 
an intercourse must be regarded as proper, consider- 
ing that they were in the same house. But to me, 
moved by the strong desire to have the daughter all 
to myself, there seemed to be more in it. Sometimes 
I even felt that the girl shunned coming to my room 
on purpose and visited K exclusively. Then you 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 223 

will ask me why I did not ask K to leave this house. 
But if I had done so, this would only have ruined 
my purpose in bringing him first to this house, and 
I could not do this. 

33 

It was one chilly rainy day in November. I, 
with my wet overcoat, passed through the shrine of 
Konnyakuemma as usual, and walked along the 
narrow slope toward home. Though K’s room was 
empty, there was fresh charcoal glowing in the 
brazier. I, wanting to warm my cold hands over 
the red coals at once, opened the sliding-door in a 
hurry. But all I found there were cold white ashes 
remaining in my brazier, and even a small lump of 
kindling charcoal was extinguished. I felt suddenly 
uncomfortable. 

Then hearing my footsteps, the okusan appeared. 
She, glancing at me, who stood silently in the middle 
of the room, helped me to take off my overcoat and 
change my kimono , looking sorry for me. Then, 
hearing me say that I was cold, brought K’s brazier 
from the next room at once. When 1 asked her 
whether he' had come back already, she replied that 
he had gone out again. On that day, too, K was 
to return home later than I, and I wondered. The 
okusan said that perhaps he had some business. 

For a while, I sat there, reading. While the 
house was hushed and not a voice was heard, the 


224 


KOKORO 


cold loneliness of the beginning of winter seemed to 
be penetrating into my body. I stood up at once, 
shutting my book. Suddenly I wanted to go to 
some lively place. It seemed to have stopped rain- 
ing at last, but as the sky still looked heavy like 
cold lead, I carried a janome - umbrella on my shoulder 
for precaution, and went down the slope eastward 
along the earthen wall behind the Arsenal. In 
those days, the streets were not yet improved, so 
the slope was more sudden than it is now. The 
road, too, was narrow, and not so straight as it is 
now. Besides, as I went down to the valley, the 
street was muddy, because of the south’s being 
blocked with high buildings and because of bad 
drainage. It was especially bad from the narrow 
stone bridge to the street of Yanagicho. We could 
not walk as we liked, no matter whether we had 
ashida 1 or boots on. Everybody had to walk care- 
fully in the middle of the road where the mud had 
been swept away by frequent passers-by, and as the 
breadth of this was only a foot or two, it was like 
walking on an obi spread across the street. All the 
passers-by walked slowly in a line. Unexpectedly, 
I met K on this narrow obi. I, whose attention was 
fixed on my legs, did not notice his presence at all, 
till I stood face to face with him. When I hap- 
pened to raise my eyes, because my front was 
blocked suddenly, I saw K standing there. I asked 


1 A kind of wooden clogs used on rainy days. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


225 


him where he had been. He only replied that he 
had just been over there. His answer had the 
usual tone of indifference. We passed by each 
other on the narrow obi. Then I saw a young woman 
standing just behind him. Being short-sighted, I 
could not see her well, but as I looked at her face 
after I passed K, I saw it was the daughter, which 
surprised me very much. The girl, slightly blushing, 
greeted me. In those days, the foreign style of do- 
ing the hair was different from now, and there was 
no projection made above the forehead, and the 
braid of hair was coiled in the middle of the head. 

I was looking at the daughter’s head absently, 
but the next moment I realized that one of us had 
to step aside. I made up my mind, and putting one 
foot into the mud, left room for her to pass. 

Then I came to the street of Yanagicho, but I 
did not know where to go. I felt as if there was 
no place which would please me. I walked in the 
mud desperately, not caring if the splashes stained 
my clothes. Then I returned straight home. 

34 

I asked K if he had gone out with the daughter. 
He denied it, and explained that they had happened 
to meet at Masagocho and come back together. I 
had to forbear from further questions. But at dinner, 
I was tempted to ask the girl the same question. She 
laughed her usual laugh which I did not like, and 


226 


KOKORO 


finally asked me to guess where she went. In those 
days, I was still quick-tempered, so I resented being 
treated in such a light manner by a young girl. But 
the okusan was the only one who noticed this. K 
was rather indifferent. As for the daughter, 1 could 
not tell whether she was doing this on purpose or 
whether she really did not understand my feelings. 
She was thoughtful for a girl, but sometimes I felt 
something in her common to all girls that I did not 
like. Besides it was after K had come that this 
point began to be noticeable. I wondered a little 
whether I should regard this as due to my jealousy 
of K or as the daughter's artfulness toward me. 
Even now, I have no intention of denying my jeal- 
ousy at that time. Because as I have repeated over 
and over again, I was clearly conscious of the work- 
ing of this feeling behind my love. Moreover, this 
feeling was sure to spring up on occasions which 
were extremely unimportant in the eyes of lookers- 
on. I am digressing from the main story now, but 
don’t you think that this jealousy is one half of 
love ? After I was married I realized that this feel- 
ing gradually became weaker, when my passion 
seemed to diminish. 

I began to wonder if I should beat my op- 
ponent’s bosom outright with my confession of love, 
which 1 had been hesitating to do. By the word 
opponent I don’t mean the daughter, but the okusan. 
I thought I should open a clear negotiation with the 
okusan for the hand of her daughter. But with such 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 22? 

a resolution, I postponed the day of carrying it out 
in action. When I speak like this, I appear to have 
been a weak young man. I don’t care if I look so, 
but it was not really for the want of will-power that 
I could not proceed. Before K came, my resolution 
not to fall into a trap oppressed me and made me 
immovable. After K came, my doubt about the 
daughter’s feelings for K always controlled me. 1 
had made up my mind that if she loved K more 
than me my love was not worth confessing. This 
was a little different from mere vanity, from avoid- 
ing the sense of shame at a refusal. I hated to 
marry a woman who secretly poured her affectionate 
glances on another, however strong my love might 
be. There are many men who are happy if they 
force a woman whom they love to marry them. But 
in those days I thought only worldly men or fools 
who could not understand the psychology of love 
could dare such a thing. My love was so strong that 
the philosophy which taught that a couple could get 
on if once they were married did not satisfy me. In 
a word, I was an exceedingly noble theorist of love, 
and at the same time, a most roundabout lover. 

The opportunities for directly confessing to the 
daughter herself occurred sometimes during my long 
stay in this house, but I purposely neglected them. 
In those days, my realization that such a thing was 
not allowed by Japanese custom was quite strong. 
But that was not all that bound me. I judged that 
the Japanese, especially the young women, had not 


228 


KOKORO 


courage enough to speak without reserve their ideas 
and feelings. 

35 

Thus I stood still, being unable to proceed in 
any direction. You know that when you are not 
well, and waken from a nap, you cannot move 
your legs and feet, though you can see things around 
you quite well. Sometimes I secredy suffered from 
this feeling. 

Soon the old year had gone and the new one 
come. One day the okusan said to K that he should 
bring some of his friends as she was going to play 
poem-cards. Then K at once replied that he had 
not a friend, which surprised the okusan. Indeed 
K had no one whom we could call his friends. 
There were some who greeted him when they met 
in the street, but they were the kind of men who 
would not play cards. Then the okusan asked if I 
could bring some of my friends, but I, too, was not 
inclined to enjoy myself with such a lively game. 
So I gave only a vague answer. But at night K and 
I were finally called out by the daughter. There 
being no guest, we were the sole players, so we 
played very quietly. Besides, K, who was not ac- 
customed to such games was like a man who sat 
with his hands in his bosom. I asked him whether 
he knew the poems of this game at all. K replied 
that he did not know them well. Perhaps the 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 229 

daughter, hearing my words, took them as an insult 
to K, and began to show clearly that she was standing 
by him, till she and K almost attacked me together. 
I might have quarrelled if it had not been for K. But 
fortunately K’s attitude was not at all different from 
that of the beginning. I, not perceiving any sign 
of triumph in him, could maintain my composure, 
and so came safely through that night. 

I think it was two or three days after this that 
the okusan and her daughter went out in the morning, 
saying that they were going to a relative in Ichigaya. 
The school having not yet begun, K and I were left 
at home to take care of the house. I did not like 
either to read or to go for a walk, so I was thinking 
vacantly, with my chin on my elbows which rested 
on the edge of the brazier. K, who was in the next 
room, did not make the slightest sound. We both 
were so quiet that people would wonder whether 
we were there or not. But between us this was not 
at all rare, so this did not trouble me. 

About ten o’clock, K suddenly opened the slid- 
ing-door and looked at me. He, standing on the 
threshold, asked me what I was thinking. Of 
course I was thinking of nothing. If I had anything 
in my mind, it might of course be the daughter as 
usual. I could not think of the daughter without 
thinking of her mother, but recently, K himself, as 
if he were an inseparable person from this problem, 
went round and round in my head, making the 
matter more complicated. I, who saw K, could not 


230 


KOKORO 


confess this frankly, though 1 was vaguely conscious 
of him as a sort of nuisance. I was silent, still 
looking at him. Then K entered my room, and 
sat down in front of the brazier at which I had 
been sitting. I took my elbows off the edge, and 
slightly pushed it toward K. 

K began to talk about a matter alien to his 
usual self. He asked where in Ichigaya the okusan 
and her daughter had gone. I replied that perhaps 
it was her aunt’s. He asked me what kind of per- 
son she was. I told him she was also the wife of 
an officer. Then he asked me why they went so 
early, when women’s New Year greetings generally 
took place after the fifteenth. I had no other reply 
than that I did not know. 

36 

K never stopped his talk about the okusan and 
the daughter, till he asked about so private a mat- 
ter that I could not reply. I was more mystified 
than annoyed. As I remembered his attitude when 
I talked to him about them, I could not help notic- 
ing the change in his tone. I asked him why he 
talked exclusively about such a thing that day. Then 
he suddenly became silent. But I watched the 
muscle of his mouth moving as if trembling. He 
was taciturn by nature. He had a way of mumbling 
before he spoke. Perhaps in the fadt that his mouth 
would not open easily as if it were rebelling against 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 231 

his will, the strength of his words lay. When his 
words broke from his mouth at all, they had twice 
as much power as the ordinary man’s. 

When I saw his mouth, I felt at once that some- 
thing was coming out, but I had no anticipation as 
to what it was. So I was surprised. Imagine me 
hearing from his awkward tongue about his pas- 
sionate love for the daughter. I was, so to speak, 
all at once turned to stone by his magic staff. I 
lost the power even of mumbling. 

Shall I describe myself at that time as a lump 
of fear, or a lump of agony ? Anyhow, I was con- 
gealed. I was suddenly hardened from head to foot 
as if I were stone or iron. I became so stiff that I 
even lost the elasticity of breathing. Fortunately 
that state did not last long. After a moment, I 
recovered my personal consciousness, and at once 
felt that I had been a terrible failure. I thought 
that I was outstripped. 

But I had no idea at all what I should do then. 
Perhaps there was not room enough for this. I sat 
still, letting the uncomfortable sweat from my arm- 
pits soak into my shirt, while K with his usual 
heavy mouth, was confessing his love little by little. 
I was filled with pain. I think that pain was 
stuck in big letters on my face like a huge ad- 
vertisement. Even K must have perceived this, but 
he, on his part, was concentrated on his own af- 
fairs, so perhaps he had no time to watch my ex- 
pression. His confession was in the same tone 


232 


KOKORO 




from the beginning to the end. It was heavy and 
slow, but it gave me an impression that it could not 
easily be moved. My mind was partly listening to 
that confession, but partly disturbed by the anxiety 
as to what I should do, so it almost missed the 
details. Yet the tone of his words vibrated strongly 
against my bosom, as well as the pain that I have 
just described. In another word, the sense of dread 
that he was stronger than I sprang up. 

When K’s story came to an end, I could say 
nothing. My silence was not prompted by the 
sense of interest, whether 1 should confess the same 
thing to him, or it was more advantageous that I 
should be silent. I simply could say nothing. Be- 
sides I was not inclined to say anything. 

At lunch I sat at the table facing him. Waited 
upon by the maid, I finished the unusually taste- 
less meal, during which we two scarcely talked. 
We did not know when the okusan would come 
back. 

37 

We returned to our separate rooms and did 
not see each other. K was as quiet as he had been 
in the morning. I, too, fell into thought. 

I thought it was proper for me to confess my 
feelings to K. But I felt that it was too late. Why 
did I not interrupt his words and counterattack 
him ? It began to seem to me that this was my 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 233 

great failure. I thought, too, that it had even been 
better if I had followed him and told him exactly 
what I had felt at that time. At any rate it seemed 
to me strange to tell him the same thing when K 
had already finished his confession. I knew no 
way to overcome this unnaturalness. My head 
trembled, shaken by repentance. 

I hoped that K would open the sliding-door 
again and rush into my room. From my point of 
view, I had been, as it were, attacked suddenly. I 
had made no preparation for receiving his assault. 
I had a secret idea of recovering what I had lost in 
the morning, so I often looked up at the sliding- 
door. But that sliding-door did not open again, 
and K was quiet all the time. 

After a while, my mind began to be disturbed 
by this quietness. I was tortured when I wondered 
what K was thinking about behind the sliding-door. 
In the rooms only separated by sliding-doors, we 
were always quiet in this way, but it was usual with 
me that the quieter he was, the more I forgot his 
existence, so I must conclude that my nerves were 
much amiss at that time. But I could not open the 
sliding-door myself. I, who had once lost the chance, 
could not but anxiously wait for him to approach 
me again. 

Finally I could not sit still. If I forced myself 
to keep quiet, I should be driven by an impulse to 
jump into K’s room. Not knowing what to do, I 
went out to the verandah. Then I went to the sit- 


234 


KOKORO 


ting-room, and with no aim, I poured the hot water 
from the kettle into my cup, and drank. Then 1 
c a me to the entrance. In this way, I tried to shun 
K’s room on purpose, and found myself in the mid- 
dle of the street. Of course I had no idea where 
to go. Only I could not keep still. So without 
caring about the direction, I walked about the streets 
festive with New Year’s decorations. My mind was 
filled with K, however much I walked. But I was 
not wandering with the desire to shake him off but 
rather to brood deliberately upon him. 

First he seemed to me enigmatic. Why did 
he suddenly confess such a thing ? Or why did his 
love become so strong that he could not help con- 
fessing it to me? And where was his usual self 
gone ? To me all these were difficult to understand. 
I knew how strong he was, and how sincere. I 
believed I had many things to decide about him, 
before I decided upon my future attitude. At the 
same time, it seemed strangely weird to deal with 
him in the future. As I wandered in the town, 
absorbed, I always drew before my eyes his look 
when he sat quite still in his room. But something 
told me that I could never move him by roaming 
about like this. Because, in a word, he seemed to 
me like a sort of devil. I even wondered if I should 
be cursed by him for ever. 

When I returned home, tired, his room was 
as still as if it contained no human being. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 235 
38 

Soon after I entered our house, I heard the 
sound of rickshaw wheels. In those days, the 
wheels had no rubber tyres as they have now, so 
the disagreeable rattling sound could be heard from 
a distance. The two rickshaws stopped in front of 
the gate. 

It was about half an hour later that I was called 
to dinner. But the okusan and the daughter’s visit- 
ing kimonos were still lying in a colourful disorder 
in the next room, left there as they had taken them 
off. They had come back in a hurry, in order to 
prepare our dinner in time, so that they should have 
no regrets on our account. But this kindness of 
the okusan was almost nothing to either K or me. 
As I sat at the table, I gave them only short, cold 
answers as if I grudged adding a word. K was more 
taciturn than I. The two women, who rarely had 
the opportunity to go out together were much 
brighter than usual, so our attitude attracted all the 
more attention. v The okusan asked me what was 
the matter. I replied that I was not quite well. I 
really felt ill. Then the daughter asked K the same 
question. But he did not give the same reply as 
mine. He only said that he did not feel like talking. 
She pursued him, asking why. At that moment I 
suddenly lifted up my heavy eyelids and looked at 
him. I had some curiosity about his reply. K’s lips 
were slightly trembling as usual, which appeared to 


236 


KOKORO 


those who were ignorant of his feelings as if he were 
wondering what answer to give. The daughter, 
laughing, observed that he must be thinking of 
something difficult again. K’s face became slightly 
flushed. 

That night I went to bed earlier than usual. 
At about ten o’clock, the okusan , anxious because 
I had said I was not well at dinner, came to my 
room with buckwheat hot water. As my room 
was already dark, she, uttering some exclamations, 
opened the sliding-door a little. The lamp cast its 
dim light aslant into my room; K seemed to be 
still at his desk. The okusan sat near my bed, and, 
saying that as I might have taken cold I had better 
warm myself, thrust the cup close to my face. So 
I was forced to drink the muddy water in her 
presence. 

I lay thinking in the dark till it was very late. 
Of course I was only turning one question round 
and round, without finding any solution. Suddenly 
1 began to wonder what K was doing in the next 
room. Half unconsciously, I called to him, “ Ho ! ” 
He replied with the same “ Ho ! ” K, too, was still 
awake. I asked him whether he was not going to 
bed. Then he simply replied that he was. I asked 
him again what he was doing. To this question he 
gave no answer. But in about five or six minutes, 
he opened the closet with a rattle, and the sound 
of his movement as he made his bed was distinctly 
heard. 1 asked him what time it was. K replied 



I THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 237 

that it was twenty minutes past one. Then I could 
hear him blowing the lamp out, and all the house 
| was hushed in darkness. 

I But my eyes grew clearer and clearer in the 

gloom. I, again in half consciousness, called to 
him. K replied in the same tone as before. Finally 
I myself began by asking him whether he would like 
to talk with me, as I wanted to know more details 
about what I had heard from him in the morning. 
Of course I had no intention to exchange such con- 
versations through the sliding-doors, but I thought 
he would answer me at once. But this time he did 
not accept my invitation in the same meekness as 
he had twice replied to my “ Ho ! ”, but was hesitat- 
ing, saying, “ Well, but,” in a low tone. Again 1 
was suddenly frightened. 

39 

K’s vague answer appeared in his attitude the 
next day, or the day after. He never appeared to 
approach the question himself. Besides there was 
no chance for any talk ; because it was difficult for 
us to speak of such a thing, unless the okusan and 
the daughter should go out together and leave us 
for a long time. I knew this quite well, but in spite 
of it, I became strangely nervous. As the result of 
; this nervousness, I, who had at first been secretly 

j preparing for his second attack, made up my mind 
to begin myself, if I had a chance. 


I 

I 


i 

* 


m 

It 

» 

i 

If! 

k 


l||s : . 

mk'i. 


i 

M: 


i if' 

f JJ’ 

- 4 


;S!fi 
< || 

. 


238 


KOKORO 


At the same time, I secretly observed the be- 
haviour of the family. But nothing unusual was 
noticeable in either the okusan’s attitude or the 
daughter’s behaviour. If there was no difference 
in their attitude before his confession and after it, 
it was certain that he had confessed his feelings 
only to me, and neither the daughter in question 
nor the okusan, her guardian, had yet heard them. 
When I was certain of this, I felt a little easier. So 
thinking it better to watch for an opportunity natu- 
rally given, than to make one on purpose and begin 
an unnatural talk with him, I decided to let the 
matter alone, doing nothing about it. 

It sounds very simple when I tell you like this, 
but till I reached this conclusion there was high as 
well as low tide, just like the ebbing and flowing of 
the sea. As I observed K’s steady manner, I inter- 
preted it in various ways. Observing the okusan 
and the daughter’s words and behaviour, I wonder- 
ed if they were really the true expressions of their 
minds and feelings. I wondered whether the com- 
plicated machines in man’s breast could point to 
the figure on the board as clearly and truly as the 
hands of a clock. Understand me in this way — I 
was finally settled in this point only after I had 
wrestled with the problem in many ways. To speak 
more accurately, a word like settle could never be 
applied to me at that time. 

Soon school began again. When our ledtures 
began at the same hour, we left our house together, 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


239 


j and came back together if we could manage to do 

so. K and I, seen from the outside, were as friendly 
| as ever. But in our minds, we each must have been 

| thinking along independent lines. One day I sud- 

) denly attacked K in the street. The point that I 

first asked him was whether his confession had been 
restricted to me alone or whether it had been made 
to the okusan and the daughter. I thought that the 
attitude which I should adopt had to be decided 
according to his answer. He affirmed that he had 
not yet confessed to anybody else. Thus the cir- 
cumstance being as 1 had assumed it to be, 1 felt 
secret pleasure. I knew very well that K was more 
daring than I. I realized that I could not match 
him in boldness. But on the other hand, I strangely 
trusted him. Though he had deceived his adopted 
family for three years about the money for his study, 
my trust in him was not the least injured. Rather, 
; t I even trusted him all the more because of that. 

So even the slightest intention of disbelieving his 
clear answer never occurred in my mind, however 
distrustful a disposition I might have. 

I asked him in what way he was going to treat 
his love. I questioned him whether it was merely 
a confession, or whether he was going to take steps 
so that he would gain what he wanted. But when 
our talk came to this, he did not answer me any- 
thing, but began to walk in silence, looking down. 
I asked him not to conceal anything from me but 
to tell me what he thought. He definitely affirmed 


240 


KOKORO 


that there was no reason for him to conceal any- 
thing from me. Yet he never gave me a word 
about what 1 tried to know. As we were in the 
street, I could not deliberately stand still and try to 
force him to make everything clear to me. So I 
left the matter there. 

40 

One day I went to the library in the university. 
It was a long time since 1 had last been there. As 
I sat at a corner of a broad desk, with the upper 
half of my body basking in the sunshine from the 
window, I was looking at the foreign magazines 
newly arrived. I had been ordered by my super- 
visor to study a certain topic of my special subjed: 
by the next week. But as the necessary article was 
not easily found, I had to change the magazines two 
or three times. Finally I found the essay I wanted, 
and began to read it in earnest. Then suddenly 
someone called my name in a low voice from the' 
opposite side of the desk, and I looked up and saw 
K standing there. K approached his face to mine, 
by bending the upper half of his body over the desk. 
You know that in the library we were not allowed 
to talk in such a voice as would disturb others, so 
this adion of K’s was common behaviour for every- 
body, but at the moment I was struck with a sort 
of strange feeling. 

K asked me in a low voice if I were studying. 


, THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 241 

I replied that I had some work to do. But K did 
not turn his face from me, and asked in the same 
low voice whether I should like to walk with him. 
I replied that I could go if he would wait for me for 
a little while. He said that he would wait, and sat 
on the vacant chair directly in front of me. Then 
suddenly it became impossible for me to read the 
magazine, my attention being diverted. I could not 
help feeling that K had something in his mind and 
came to negotiate with me. I could not but shut 
the magazine which I was reading and stand up. K 
asked me calmly whether I had finished it already. 
I replied that it was not necessary for me to finish 
it then, and after returning it, went out of the library 
with K. 

As we had no place to go to, we came to Ikeno- 
hata from Tatsuokacho, and entered the Ueno park. 
Then suddenly he began to talk about his love. 
Considering his manner and the circumstances at 
that time, I think he took the trouble to take me 
for a walk for this purpose. But his attitude was 
no more practical than before. He just vaguely 
asked me what I thought, that is, with what eyes I 
looked at him, who had fallen into such an abyss 
of love as this. In a word, he seemed to be want- 
ing my criticism about his condition. In this, I 
thought I could certainly perceive something dif- 
ferent from his usual self. I may be repeating this 
too much, but his nature was not made so weak 
that he would be afraid of others’ opinions about 


242 


KOKORO 


him. He had both spirit and courage to go straight 
ahead all alone, when he once found the right way 
and believed in it. So it was natural for me, who 
had been strongly impressed by this trait in his 
character at the time when he had troubles with his 
adopted family, to realize that he was decidedly 
different. 

When I asked him why he needed my opinion 
on the matter, he said in a dispirited tone, quite 
unusual with him, that he was really ashamed of 
his being a weak man, and that as he could not 
make himself out, being doubtful, he knew no other 
way but to ask me for a fair criticism. I at once 
asked him the meaning of his being doubtful. He 
explained that he was at a loss as to whether he 
should advance or withdraw. Immediately I stepped 
forward, and asked him whether he could withdraw 
if he wanted. There his words suddenly failed him. 
He only said that he was tortured. Indeed his pain 
was plainly shown in his face. If it had not been 
the daughter whom he loved, I could have poured 
a shower of favourable words on his thirsty face, 
which was like the dry earth crying for the benevo- 
lent rain. I believe that I am a man born with such 
power of sympathy as this. But I was different at 
that time. 

41 

I was watching K as carefully as a fencer going 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


243 


to try his skill with a follower of another school. 
I confronted him with everything which belonged 
to me-— my eyes, mind and body — fully prepared for 
the fight. The innocent K, on the other hand, was 
so careless that it was more suitable to describe him 
as thoroughly open to the attack than as full of un- 
guarded points. It was, therefore, as if I could get 
from his own hands the map of a fortress which he 
had been keeping, and peruse it before him. 

I, discovering K’s uncertainty between the ideal 
and the reality, watched only for the point by which 
I could knock him down by a single blow, and took 
advantage of his unguarded side. I suddenly began 
to assume a grave, serious look. This was of course 
a part of my scheme, but I actually felt as tense as 
I looked, so there was no room in me for a sense 
of shame or an appreciation of the ridiculousness 
of my own behaviour. First, I cried that those who 
had no sense of spiritual progress were foolish. 
These were the exact words by which K criticised 
me when we were travelling in Boshu together. I 
threw them down at him, in the same tone as his. 
But this was not a revenge. I confess that the words 
as uttered by me had more cruel meaning than mere 
revenge. I tried to block his way of love by this 
single sentence. 

K was born in a Shinshu temple. But his ideas, 
even during his days in the middle school, were 
inclined to be very different from that of his family. 
I knew quite well that I, who do not know the 




244 


KOKORO 


subtle differences of one Buddhist sedt from another, 
have no right to say such a thing as this, but I un- 
derstood this only concerning the question of man 
and woman. K had liked the word shojin from long 
before. I had understood this word as including 
suppression of passions. But I was surprised to 
find after asking him that it contained something 
stricter than that. That all must be sacrificed for 
the michi being his first article of faith, even purely 
spiritual love itself was banned, not to mention 
physical passions. I often heard this idea when he 
was trying to live by himself. I, who had been in 
love with the daughter even in those days, could 
not but oppose him. Whenever I did so, he looked 
sorry for me. There was much more contempt 
than sympathy expressed in his look. 

As we had come through such a past as this, 
the sentence I uttered was sure to hurt him. Yet, 
as 1 said before, by this single sentence I did not 
intend to trample down all the past which he had 
constructed, but rather tried to make him build his 
future on it as before. I did not care if it would 
reach the michi or the heaven. I was only afraid 
of his suddenly changing his direction and inter- 
fering with my advantage. In a word, my cry was 
only the expression of my egoism. 

“ Those who have no sense of spiritual progress 
are foolish.” I repeated it again, and watched how 
it would affect K. 

■ “Yes, foolish,” he replied, “I am a fool,” 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 245 

He stood still, and did not move. He looked 
down and watched the earth. In spite of myself, 1 
was frightened. At that moment, I felt as if he 
were a burglar who turned into a hold-up man. 
But I noticed that his voice was too weak for a hold- 
up man. I wanted to consult the expression of his 
eyes, but he never looked at me. Then he began 
to walk slowly. 

42 

As I walked side by side with him, I secretly 
waited for the next word which would come from 
him. Perhaps ambush is a more suitable word to 
describe my attitude. At that time it seemed to me 
all right even if I assaulted him unawares. But I 
had the conscience of a cultured man, so if some- 
body had approached me whispering “You are a 
coward ” just once, I might have come back to my 
usual self in a moment. If it had been K who said 
this, I should have blushed before him. Only, K 
was too honest, too unsophisticated, to reprove me, 
and his personality, too good. I, blinded, forgot to 
respedt it, but took advantage of it. I tried to knock 
him down using it as my weapon. 

After a while, K called my name, and looked at 
me. This time it was I who naturally stopped. Then 
K too stopped. It was at that moment that I could 
finally look right in front of me into K’s eyes. K 
was taller than I, so I had to look up ; and in this 


246 


KOKORO 


posture, and with a heart like a wolf I faced him, 
who was exactly like an innocent lamb. 

“ Let us stop this,” he said. There was strange 
sadness in his eyes as well as in his words, and I 
could not say anything for a while. Then he re- 
peated it in a tone of entreaty, “ Please don’t talk 
about this any more.” Then I gave him a cruel 
answer, like a wolf going to fasten his teeth on the 
throat of a defenceless lamb. 

“ You ask me to stop, but 1 did not begin it. 
It’s you who asked me to tell you my opinion. But 
if you wish to stop, I don’t mind doing so, only, it 
is of no use stopping talking, if you have no resolu- 
tion to stop the thing itself. Where on earth is 
your philosophy, what are you going to do with it? ” 

When I finished, the tall K seemed to have 
become smaller. He was a very obstinate man, as 
I have said again and again ; but on the other hand, 
so honest that he could not but care if his contra- 
dictions were pointed out and severely reproved. 
When I perceived the full consequence of my speech, 
I was finally reassured. Then suddenly he asked, 
“Resolution?” and before I replied, added, “Re- 
solution — yes, I have still some resolution.” His 
tone was like a soliloquy, or the words uttered in a 
dream. 

We left the matter there, and walked toward 
our house in Koishikawa. It was a warm day, com- 
paratively windless, but in winter the park was 
deserted. Especially when I looked back at the 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 247 

cedar-trees, with their leaves turned brown by the 
frost, towering into the dark sky, 1 felt as if the 
cold had crept into my back. We quickly passed 
through Hongo Hill in twilight, and walked down 
into the valley of Koishikawa to go up the hill 
beyond. It was then that I finally began to feel the 
warmth of my body under my coat. 

As we were in a hurry, we hardly spoke on our 
way back. When we sat at the dinner table, the 
okusan asked me why we were so late. I replied 
that we had been to Ueno as K wanted a walk. 
She looked surprised, and said, “ Why, it is so cold.” 
The daughter wanted to know if there was anything 
on in Ueno. I replied that nothing was on in Ueno, 
but that we just went for a walk. K, who used to 
be silent, was still more silent this evening. Even 
if the okusan talked to him, or the daughter laughed, 
he seldom opened his mouth. Then, finishing his 
rice as if he were swallowing it with an effort, he 
went back to his room before I did. 

43 

In those days, the words “ awakening ” or “ new 
life ” had not yet come into fashion, but the reason 
why K did not throw his old self off and run in the 
new direction at full speed was not because of his 
wanting the modern outlook of life, but because of 
his possessing the past, which was so precious to 
him that he could not throw it away. It is almost 


248 


KOKORO 


right to say that he had always lived for this past. 
So it was not because his love was feeble that he 
did not rush diredtly toward the objedt of his love. 
Even if his love was burning within him, he could 
not move blindly. Unless he was forced by the 
strongest impulse to forget everything, K had to 
stand still for a while to cast a glance on his past. 
Then he was obliged to go on the way directed by 
his past as before. Moreover, he had dogged per- 
severance rare in modern people. I thought I read 
his mind through in these points. 

The night I came back from Ueno was a com- 
paratively peaceful one for me. I pursued K after 
he had gone back to his room, and sat by his desk, 
and deliberately began to talk foolish gossip. He 
looked annoyed. Perhaps some look of triumph 
shone in my eyes. I was sure my voice sounded 
triumphant. After warming myself beside the same 
brazier with K, I came back to my room. At that 
moment, I, who was inferior to him in everything else, 
had the realization that he was not worth any fear. 

Soon I fell into a peaceful sleep, but was sud- 
denly awakened by a voice calling my name. 1 
looked up, and saw that the sliding-doors were open 
about two feet, and K’s dark figure stood there. In 
his room, there was still a lamp shining as mine had 
been in the early hours of the night. I, suddenly 
brought to this from dreamland, could not speak 
for a while, and blankly looked at this scene. 

K asked me if I had been asleep. He was al- 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 249 

ways late at night. I asked him, standing like a 
black shadow in the doorway, if he wanted me to 
do anything for him. He replied that there was 
nothing, but he wondered if I was still awake and 
just asked. As the light was shining on his back, 
I could not see the expression of his eyes and face 
at all, but his voice was even calmer than usual. 

Then K shut the sliding-doors, and my room 
returned to its former darkness. I shut my eyes 
again in order to dream quietly in this darkness. 
Soon I became unconscious. But next morning, 
this event during the night struck me as strange. I 
wondered if it was all a dream, so I asked K at break- 
fast. He said certainly he opened the sliding-doors 
and called my name. I asked him why he did so, 
but he did not reply clearly, and after my mind had 
almost left the matter, asked me if I could sleep 
well recently. I felt strange, though I did not know 
why. 

That day, we had our ledtures at the same hour, 
so we went out together. On our way to the uni- 
versity, I, who had been troubled about last night, 
asked him again. But he did not give me any satis- 
factory answer. 1 asked again if he had intended to 
tell me something about his love. He denied this in 
a strong, definite tone, as if he were reminding me 
that he had already said “ Let us stop this ” in Ueno 
the day before. K had an acute pride in matters 
like this. As I realized this, the word “resolution ” 
suddenly came back to my mind. Then this word, 


250 


KOKORO 


which I had hardly thought about, began to oppress 
my mind in strange force* 

44 

“T 

K’s resolute character was thoroughly known 
to me. I knew very well too why he was irreso- 
lute about this matter only. In other words, I 
was triumphant, as I had added to my understand- 
ing of his usual self the knowledge of his peculiar 
reaction to love. But while I was chewing his word 
“resolution” in my mind, my sense of triumph 
began to fade, and finally began to flicker. I began 
to wonder if this might not be exceptional. I began 
to doubt if in his secret heart he had the final means 
to solve all his doubts and anguish all at once. 
Coming back to the word in this new light, I was 
surprised. Perhaps it might have been better if, at 
this surprise, I had searched for the real meaning 
of the word with an open mind. But alas ! I was 
half blinded. I interpreted the word as his resolu- 
tion only to approach the daughter. I believed with 
all my heart and mind that this meant the realization 
of his resolute character in the sphere of love. 

I heard in my ears a voice whisper that I also 
needed the last resolution. In answer to this voice, 
I pulled myself together. I made up my mind that 
I should have to carry on the business before K, 
and moreover with him ignorant of it. 

Silently I was waiting for the opportunity to 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 251 

come. But though two or three days passed, I could 
not seize it. I had thought I should negotiate with 
the okusan when both K and the daughter were out. 
But every day I found that when one was out the 
other was in, and could not find a single chance. I 
was irritated. , 

After a week, I could not wait any more, and 
pretended to be ill. The okusan, as well as the 
daughter and K, tried to get me up, but with a vague 
answer, I did not leave my bed till about ten. I 
waited for the house to become hushed, K and the 
daughter having gone, and finally got up. The 
okusan, seeing me, asked me what was the matter. 
She also advised me to stay in bed, as she would 
send me my breakfast. But I was too well and 
strong to remain in bed, and when I finished wash- 
ing, I had my breakfast in the sitting-room as usual. 
The okusan served me, sitting on the other side of 
the long brazier. With my bowl in my hand, eating 
a meal which was too late for breakfast and too early 
for lunch, I was troubled in my mind by the prob- 
lem of how to begin my negotiations, so I think I 
really looked a sufferer. 

Having finished my breakfast, I began to smoke. 
As I did not stand up, the okusan could not leave 
her seat beside the brazier. She called the maid, 
and ordering her to clear the table, talked with me, 
as she was pouring water into the kettle and wiping 
the brazier. I asked her if she was particularly busy. 
She replied that she was not, but asked why. I 


252 


KOKORO 


said that I had something to discuss with her. She 
asked what it was, looking at my face. Her tone 
was so light that it seemed impossible for her to 
enter my mood, and I hesitated. 

Not knowing what to do, I roamed about in 
idle words, and asked her if K had said anything 
recently. She looked as if she had never dreamed 
of such a thing, and asked me what it was K wanted 
to say. Then before I replied, she said, “ Did he 
say something to you ? ” 

45 

I, who had not had the slightest intention of 
telling K’s confession to the okusan, said, “ O no.” 
The next moment, this lie made me feel uneasy. 
But all I could do was to say that it was not about 
K that 1 wanted to speak to her, as the thought came 
to me that he had never asked me to do anything 
for him. The okusan, saying “ Yes ”, was waiting 
for my next words, and I had to begin. I said quite 
suddenly, “ Okusan, please give me your daughter.” 
She did not look so much surprised as I had ex- 
pected, yet apparently was not prepared for any 
answer for a while, and looked at my face in silence. 
As 1 had already begun, I could not afford to be 
embarrassed by her scrutiny of my face, and repeated, 
“ O please at all costs,” and added, “ Give her to 
me as my wife.” The okusan, who was older, was 
far calmer than I was, and said, “Yes, but is it not 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 253 

too sudden 1 ” When in an instant I replied, “ Yes, 
I want her at once,” she began to laugh, and asked 
me again, “ Have you thought about it carefully 1 ” 
And I explained to her in strong words that even 
though I referred to this matter suddenly I had been 
constantly thinking about it. 

After that, we exchanged two or three questions 
and answers, but 1 forgot what they were about. 
The okusan was clear-minded and decisive like a 
man, and I found it much easier to deal with her in 
a matter like this than with an ordinary woman. 
“All right, you shall have her,” she said. Then 
afterwards she said, “ It seems as if you were beg- 
ging me to give her, but really it is I who am to beg 
you to have her. As you know, she is a poor, 
fatherless child.” 

Our talk came to an end, simple and clear. I. 
think it did not take more than a quarter of an 
hour from the beginning to the end. The okusan 
did not ask me anything. She said there was no 
need to consult their relatives, but it was all right 
if she told them afterwards. She clearly stated that 
it was not even necessary to ask the daughter. It 
seemed as if I, whose education was higher than 
hers, was more conventional and formal than she 
was in these matters. When I remarked that she 
ought to ask the daughter, if not the relatives, she 
said, “It is all right. How should I marry my 
daughter to a man whom she does not like ? ” 

As I came back to my room, I felt queer, be- 




254 


KOKORO 


cause things had gone on so easily. Doubts even 
crept into my mind from I knew not where, and I 
wondered if it was really all right. But the idea 
that my future destiny was more or less decided by 
this renewed everything in me. 

About at lunch-time, I went to the sitting-room 
and asked the okusan when she would tell her 
daughter about my proposal. She said it would not 
matter to me when she told her, as she, who knew 
her daughter best, consented to this matter. I felt 
she was much more like a man than I was, and was 
going to leave her, when she stopped me and said, if 
I wanted her to tell the daughter as soon as possible, 
she would tell her this afternoon, immediately after 
she came back from school. I asked her to do so, 
and came back to my room. But when I pictured 
myself silently sitting at my desk and listening to 
the private talks of the mother and her daughter in 
the sitting-room, I felt it impossible to remain calm. 
Finally I put on my hat, and went out. At the 
bottom of the hill, however, I passed the daughter, 
who looked surprised to see me. When I took off 
my hat, and said, “ Hullo,” she asked me if I was 
well again, looking puzzled. I replied, “ O yes, I am 
very well now,” and quickly turned down the road 
toward Suidobashi. 

46 

I went into the street of Jinbocho from Sam- 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 255 

gakucho and turned down the road toward Ogawa- 
machi. It was always to poke into the second-hand 
bookshops that I roamed about the district, but on 
that day I could not bring myself to look at the 
worn-out books. r Walking, I was incessantly think- 
ing about the house I had just left. I thought about 
the okusan — what had passed between her and me 
before I came out; I imagined what she and her 
daughter might be doing after the latter had come 
back. In a word, I was, as it were, made to walk 
about by these imaginings. Moreover, sometimes I 
suddenly stood still, quite unconsciously, in the mid- 
dle of the street, and wondered if at that moment 
the okusan was telling her daughter about me, and 
at other times, I wondered if it was all over. 

I finally crossed Mansei Bridge, and went up 
the Myojin slope and came to Hongo Hill, then 
went down Kikusaka to the valley of Koishikawa. 
I walked about in the three wards, drawing a flat 
circle. Strangely the thought of K never entered 
my mind during this long walk. Now when I look 
back on those days, and ask myself why I forgot 
entirely about K, I cannot think of any reason. I 
only wonder. Was it because my mind was so 
concentrated on another matter that I could forget 
K 1 But my conscience could never have allowed 
me to do so. 

My guilty feeling toward K revived when I 
opened the entrance-door and was going to enter 
my room, that is, at the moment when I was going 


256 


KOKORO 


to pass through his room. He was reading at his 
desk as usual. As usual he lifted his eyes from the 
book and looked at me. But he did not greet me 
with his usual words. He asked me, “Are you 
better now ? Have you been to the docftor ? ” At 
that moment, I was almost tempted to kneel before 
him and ask his pardon. This impulse was not at 
all a weak one. If only K and I had been standing 
in the middle of a heath, I am sure I should have 
obeyed the order of my conscience and asked his 
pardon on the spot. But there were other people 
in the house. My natural impulse was checked, and 
alas, did not ever again revive. 

At dinner, 1 saw K again. K, who was com- 
pletely ignorant of what had happened on that day, 
was only melancholy, and not the slightest sign of 
suspicion could be perceived in his eyes. The oku' 
san , who also did not know the secret between K 
and me, looked happier than usual. It was only I 
who knew everything. I swallowed the rice which 
tasted like lead. The daughter did not appear at 
the table as usual. When the okusan called her, she 
only replied “Yes” from the next room, but did 
not come. As he heard this, K looked mystified, and 
finally asked the okusan what was the matter. She 
replied that perhaps her daughter was shy, stealing 
a look at me. K, wondering more, began to ask 
why she was shy. The okusan, smiling, looked at 
my face again. 

From the moment when I sat at the table, I 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 257 

almost guessed what had happened by the okusan’s 
look. But 1 felt it would be extremely awkward if 
she explained everything to him at this moment. I 
was in great consternation, because the okusan was 
a woman who could have done such a thing. But 
fortunately K returned to his former silence. The 
okusan, who was in higher spirits than usual, did 
not proceed further. I heaved a sigh, and returned 
to my room. But I could not help thinking about 
what attitude I should take toward K in the future. 
I tried to invent various apologies in my mind. 
But there was not any worthy of being offered to K. 
Coward that I was, I became tired of explaining 
myself to him. 

47 

I spent two or three days in that state. During 
those days, the never-ceasing uneasiness because of 
K oppressed my mind. Even if no perceptible 
change had taken place in the household, I might 
have felt 1 had to do something for him. Moreover 
the okusan’s tone and her daughter’s attitude pricked 
my conscience, as they reminded me of my engage- 
ment and K. The okusan, who was in some ways 
straightforward as a man, might betray me at any 
moment and tell everything to K at meal-time. The 
daughter’s attitude toward me, which became de- 
cidedly more intimate than before, might provoke 
K’s doubts. I was put in the position that I must 


KOKORO 



258 


tell him of the new relationship established between 
this family and me. But it seemed a very difficult 
task to me, who knew my own moral weakness too 
well. 

Not knowing what to do, I thought I should 
ask the okusan to tell him, of course in my absence. 
But if she told him the real story, it would make no 
difference except that it was indiredtly told. On 
the other hand, if I asked her to tell a made-up 


story, she would certainly cross-examine me. If 
I were to tell her everything and ask her favour, I 
had to expose my weakness to my sweetheart and 



her mother from my own choice. As I was an 
honest youth, I could not help thinking that this 
would affedt my future reputation. It seemed to be 
an unendurable misfortune to lose my sweetheart’s 
trust before my marriage, however slightly it might 


In short, I was a fool who missed his footing 
in trying to walk the way of honesty. Or I was a 
cunning man. My soul and Heaven were all that 
knew of this at that moment. But in order to get 
up again and step forward I had to announce my 
fall to the people around me whatever happened. I 
wanted to conceal my fall to the end, but at the 
same time, 1 was impelled to advance. My feet 
were rooted to the ground because of this dilemma 
and could not go any further. 

Five or six days later, the okusan suddenly asked 
me if I had told K about my engagement. I replied 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 259 

that I had not yet done so. Then she reproved 
me, asking why I had not. 1 hardened at this ques- 
tion. Even now I can clearly remember the words 
by which the okusan startled me at that time. 

“ No wonder that he looked funny when I told 
him. It is very naughty of you to conceal it from 
such an intimate friend as he.” 

I asked the okusan if K said anything at that 
time. She replied that he said nothing in particular. 
But I could not help asking for further details. The 
okusan, who had no reason to conceal them from 
me, described to me K’s behaviour most minutely, 
after a preliminary remark that there was nothing 
worth telling. 

Considering all the okusan had said, K seemed 
to have received this final blow with calm surprise. 
At first he only said “ Is that so ? ” about the new 
relationship formed between the daughter and me. 
But when the okusan said, “ Do congratulate them 
on it,” he looked at her face for the first time, and 
smiling, said, “ I am so glad,” and stood up. Then 
before he opened the sliding-door of the sitting- 
room, he asked, turning his face towards the okusan, 
“ When will they get married ? ” and said, “ I should 
very much like to give them some present, but I am 
afraid I cannot, because I have no money.” I, who 
sat in front of the okusan and listened to her talk, 
felt an acute pain in my breast as if it were com- 
pletely choked. 


260 


KOKORO 


48 

Calculating, 1 found that it was more than two 
days since the okusan had told him. During those 
days, there was no difference in K’s manner toward 
me, so that I had not suspedted it at all. I thought 
that his detached air was worth admiring, even if 
he only managed to wear it to disguise his internal 
pain. When I made K and myself stand side by 
side in my mind and compared the two, he looked 
far greater than I. The thought, “ I have failed as 
a man, even if I have triumphed in my scheme,” 
arose like a whirlwind in my breast. I secretly 
blushed, thinking how much K might be despising 
me. But it was more painful to my self-resped: to 
go to him now and be humiliated. 

It was Saturday night when in my indecision I 
finally made up my mind to wait till the next day. 
But on that very night, K died, committing suicide. 
It makes me shiver even now to remember the scene. 
Perhaps it was not a mere accident that that night I 
lay with my head towards the West, though I usually 
lay towards the East. 1 happened to be awakened 
by the chilly draught coming over my head, then 
when I looked, I found that the sliding-doors be- 
tween K’s room and mine were open as much as the 
other night. But there was no black shadow of K 
standing there. Moved by a sudden impulse, I 
propped my body on my elbows and getting up, 
cast a sharp glance into K’s room. I saw the dim 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 261 

lamp light, and the bed. But the quilt was piled up 
at the foot of the bed, as if the sleeper had found 
it too hot and had torn it off, and K himself lay on 
his stomach, with his head toward the further side 
of the room, . 

I called “Ho”, but there was no answer. 
“ What is the matter ? ” I called again. But K’s 
body did not move at all. I immediately stood up 
and walked toward the threshold, and looked round 
his room by the dim lamp light. 

The first impression that I received at that 
moment was almost like the one when K had sud- 
denly confessed his love. As soon as my eyes 
glanced at the inside of the room, they lost their 
capacity to move, as if they had been turned into 
artificial ones made of glass. I stood, as if my feet 
had been rooted to the floor. Then when this state 
had passed like a squall, I again felt that I had made 
a terrible confusion. The dimness — the full con- 
sciousness of the irretrievable disaster — pierced my 
being, and in a moment cast its dismal light on my 
whole future. I began to tremble. y 

Yet I could not forget myself to the last. I 
soon noticed a letter on the desk. It was directed 
to me as I had expedted. I frantically opened it. 
However, nothing I had expedted could be found 
there. I had expedted many sentences which would 
severely hurt me, and I had feared how the okusan 
and her daughter would despise me if they read the 
letter. When I glanced at it, I felt a great relief. 



262 


KOKORO 


(It was only from the worldly point of view that 1 
was relieved, but it seemed exceedingly important 
to me.) 

The content of the letter was simple, and was 
rather abstract. It said that he was so weak in mind 
and devoid of enterprising spirit that he could see 
no hope in his future, and therefore he would com- 
mit suicide. Then in simple phrases, his thanks 
for my kindness to him were added, and also an- 
other sentence asking me to take care of his affairs 
after his death. Then he asked me to ask the ofeu- 
sari’s pardon for troubling her so much by seeking 
death in this way, and to let his relatives in the 
country know this. All necessary things were 
referred to in simple wording, but there was not a 
hint to the daughter. When I finished the letter, 
I realized that K had deliberately avoided the name 
of the daughter. What struck and pained me most 
was the postscript which seemed to have been 
added with the remnant of his Chinese ink, and 
which said that he should have died long before 
and that he could not understand why he lived on 
till then. 

With trembling hands, I folded the letter and 
put it into the envelope. I deliberately put it on 
the desk, hoping that it would attract everybody’s 
attention, and turning back, I saw for the first time 
on the sliding-door the blood that had burst forth 
from K’s body. 


263 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 
49 

With a sudden movement I held K’s head with 
both my hands and lifted it a little. I wanted to have 
a look at his face. But as I peeped into his face 
which was turned toward the floor by thus lifting 
it, I withdrew my hands immediately. It was not 
only because I shuddered, but also because his head 
seemed to me so heavy. For a while I looked at his 
cold ears which I had just touched and his thick 
black hair which was cut short and which was not 
at all different from his life-time. I could not weep 
at all. I was only filled with fear. I not only felt 
the simple sensual fear caused by the scene in front 
of me, but was also deeply impressed by the dreadful 
destiny which was revealed by this friend who had 
suddenly changed into a cold mass. 

Not knowing what to do, I went back to my 
room, and began to walk about the eight-mat room. 
My mind ordered me to do this, though it knew 
that there was no meaning in it. I felt I had to do 
something, and at the same time I thought I could 
not do anything. I could not help walking round 
and round the room, like a bear put in a pen. 

Sometimes I wanted to wake up the okusan. 
But the thought that it would never do to show 
this scene to a woman prevented me. The strong 
resolution that even if I could wake her up I could 
never frighten the daughter oppressed me. So I 
resumed my pacing round and round the room. 


264 


KOKORO 



While I was walking in this way, I lighted my 
lamp, and often looked at my watch. The time 
never passed so slowly. I don’t know exadtly what 
time I first woke up, but evidently it was near the 
dawn. I, longing for the dawn as I walked round 
and round, was tortured by the dread that this dark- 
ness would go on for ever. 

We used to get up before seven. This was be- 
cause our ledtures often began at eight. The maid, 
therefore, was to get up at about six. However, it 
was before six that I went to wake her up. Then 
the okusan, hearing me, told me that it was Sunday. 
She seemed to be awakened by my footsteps in the 
corridor. So I asked her to come to my room. She 
followed me, putting on her everyday haori over 
her night-dress. As soon as we entered my room, 
I shut the sliding-doors which had been open, and 
said to the okusan that something extraordinary had 
happened. She asked what it was. I pointed to 
the next room with my chin, and said, “ Please 
don’t be frightened.” She lost colour. 1 said again, 
“ Okusan, K has committed suicide.” As if she were 
cowed, the okusan stood in silence, looking at my 
face. Then suddenly I sat down and bowed low to 
her, and said, “ I am so sorry. It was all my fault. I 
am so sorry to be troubling you and your daughter.” 
I had never thought of such a thing till the moment 
when I stood in front of her. But when I looked 
at her face, such words rushed from me uncon- 
sciously. Please interpret this in this way, that I 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 265 

had to beg the okusan’s pardon, as I could not beg 
K’s forgiveness any more. That is to say, my natural 
self was too strong to be controlled by my worldly 
self, and made me impulsively speak out the words 
of penitence. It was fortunate for me that the oku - 
son did not take them in such a deep sense. With 
a pale face, but consolingly, she said, “ It is a sudden 
unexpected accident, and no one is to be blamed,” 
But surprise and fear gripped the muscles of her 
face, as if they were carved there. 

50 

' \ ' 

I was sorry to show such a sight to the okusan, 
but I went and opened the sliding-doors which I 
had just shut. At that moment K’s room was al- 
most dark, as the oil was burnt up in the lamp. I 
stepped back, and with my lamp in my hands, turned 
to the okusan as I stood at the threshold. Stand- 
ing behind me as if she were trying to hide herself, 
she peeped into the four-mat room. She would not 
enter the room, but asked me to open the shutters. 

Her adtions after that were completely to the 
point as was worthy of an officer’s wife. I went to 
the dodtor, and also to the police-station. I did 
this all because I was ordered by the okusan . Till 
such necessary proceedings were finished, she did 
not admit anybody to K’s room. 

K had died almost instantly by cutting his 
carotid artery with a small knife. There was no 


266 KOKORO 

Other wound to be seen. It was clear that the blood 
on the sliding-doors which I had seen by the dreamy 
dim light had gushed all at once from his neck. I 
looked at it again clearly by the daylight* and was 
surprised at the vehement power of a man s blood. 

The okusan and I cleaned K’s room, using all 
our brain and skill. Fortunately his blood was 
mostly absorbed in the quilts, and the mats on the 
floor were not stained very much, so it was com- 
paratively easy to clean. We brought his body 
into my room, and made him lie down as if he were 
asleep. Then I went out to send a telegram to his 

h ° m< When I returned, incense was already being 
burned close to his head. As soon as 1 entered the 
room, the sacred scent greeted me, and 1 perceived 
two women sitting amidst the smoke. I saw the 
daughter for the first time since the event. She 
was weeping. The okusan’s eyes, too, were red. I, 
who had forgotten to weep till then, could at last 
indulge in sorrow. How much was my heart re- 
lieved by this sorrow l It watered my heart which 

was dried up by pain and fear. 

I sat in silence beside these women. The oku- 
san asked to offer incense to K. I did so, and again 
sat without a word. The daughter did not say any- 
thing to me. Rarely she spoke to her mother a 
word or two, but it was all about something to be 
done immediately. There was yet no room in her 
mind to talk reminiscently about K* Still, I thought 



THE SENSEI A;ND HIS LAST LETTER 267 

it very fortunate to have been able to spare her from 
the dreadful sight of the early dawn. I was afraid 
such a sight would destroy the beauty of a young 
sensitive girl. I could not forget this even when 
my horror was so strong that it seemed to be per- 
vading the tips of my hair. I felt the same sort of 
uneasiness as I might feel if I struck a pretty inno- 
cent flower at random. 

When K’s father and brother came from the 
country, I told them my ideas about K’s grave. K 
and I often walked in the neighbourhood of Zoshi- 
gaya, and he was very fond of the cemetery there. 
So I promised him, of course jokingly, that I would 
bury him there if he died. I wondered if it would 
mean anything to him now to fulfil my promise and 
put him in Zoshigaya. But I wanted to kneel down 
in front of his grave and renew my penitence every 
month as long as I lived. Perhaps K’s father and 
brother felt a little obligation to me who had been 
helping their outcast son and brother, for they con- 
sented to my proposal. 

51 

On my way back from K’s funeral, one of his 
friends asked me why K had committed suicide. 
Since his death, I had been tortured by this ques- 
tion. The okusan and her daughter, K’s father and 
brother from the country, his acquaintances to 
whom 1 wrote and told of his death, and even the 


268 


KOKORO 


journalists who had nothing to do with him — all 
asked me the same question. Whenever I was 
confronted by this question, my conscience ached, 
as if it were pricked by a needle, and I heard a voice 
through the question saying, “ Confess quickly that 
you, have killed him.” 

I gave the same answer to everybody. I only 
repeated the contents of K’s last letter to me, never 
adding a word to it. K’s friend, who asked me the 
same question and received the same answer from 
me on our way back from the funeral, produced a 
newspaper from his breast-pocket and showed it to 
me. As I walked, I read the article that he pointed 
out to me. It stated that K’s suicide was prompted 
by his pessimistic outlook on life due to his family 
trouble. Without saying anything I folded the 
newspaper and returned it to him. He also told 
me that in another newspaper they said that K had 
gone mad and killed himself. I had been so busy 
that I had had no time to read the papers, and had 
no idea how they treated K’s death, but it had been 
troubling me all the same. I was very much afraid 
that an article might bring trouble to the okusan and 
her daughter. I especially dreaded lest the daughter’s 
name should be referred to, however lightly. I 
asked him if he had come across other papers saying 
different things about this matter. He said these 
two were all he had noticed. 

It was soon after this that we moved to our 
present house. The okusan and her daughter could 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 269 

not stand the old house. To me, too, it was a torture 
to be constantly reminded of the event of that night, 
and so we decided to move. 

Two months later I safely graduated from the 
university, and scarcely had a half year passed since 
my graduation, when I was married to the daughter. 
Externally, everything came out as I had expedted, 
so I should have congratulated myself on my felicity. 
The okusan and her daughter looked extremely 
happy. I, too, was happy. But to my happiness a 
dark shadow was attached, and 1 wondered if this 
happiness would finally lead me to a tragic doom. 

When we were married, the daughter — no, she 
was already my wife, so I shall refer to her as such 
from now on — my wife suddenly proposed that we 
should visit K’s grave together. Without any def- 
inite reason, I was startled, and asked her why she 
thought of such a thing. Then she said K would 
be very happy if we two went and visited his grave. 
I gazed intently at her innocent face, without realiz- 
ing it until she asked me why I looked so strange. 

To gratify her wish, 1 went to Zoshigaya with 
my wife. I washed the new grave-stone with water, 
and my wife put some flowers and incense in front 
of it. We bowed and worshipped. I am sure my 
wife wanted to tell K all that had happened to us, 
so that K could share our happiness. But all 1 re- 
peated in my mind over and over again were the 
words that I was to blame. She rubbed K’s grave- 
stone and said she liked it very much. It was not a 


270 


KOKORO 


very good one, but because I had gone to a stone- 
mason myself and ordered it, she must have wished 
to praise it. I thought of K’s bones, newly buried 
under this grave-stone ; then 1 thought of my new 
wife, and I could not help feeling the mockery of 
Destiny. Then I made up my mind not to visit K’s 
grave with my wife. 


52 



Such a feeling toward my dead friend lasted 
for a long time. This was indeed what I had feared 
from the beginning. Even my marriage, my long 
cherished hope, I went through with an uneasy 
mind. But because no human being can see through 
the future, I thought it would perhaps change my 
mood completely and lead me to a new life. How- 
ever, when I began to live with my wife, my fragile 
hope was destroyed by the stern reality. As I 
looked at my wife, I Was suddenly threatened by K. 
That is to say, my wife stood between K and me, 
and bound me to him, never releasing me from his 
apparition. Though everything in my wife pleased 
me, I wanted to shun her because of this one thing. 
On the other hand, this feeling of mine immediately 
impressed itself on her sensitive heart, and yet she 
could not understand the reason for it. She often 
cross-examined me as to what I was musing on so 
intently and asked me what was wrong with her. 
Sometimes I could laugh it off, but sometimes she 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 271 

became hysterical, complaining, “You must be 
disliking me,” or “ I am sure you are keeping some- 
thing from me,” and I was tortured. 

1 often thought of confessing the truth to my 
wife. But whenever I was on the verge of telling 
her, some power outside myself suddenly came upon 
me and restrained me. Perhaps it is not necessary 
to tell you why, because you understand me so well, 
but I feel 1 ought to explain this. In those days I 
had no intention whatever to pretend to my wife 
that I was a worthier man than I really was. More- 
over, if I had confessed everything to my wife with 
a heart as honest and meek as when I faced K in 
my mind, she would have certainly forgiven my sin, 
even with tears of joy, and so I was not consulting 
my own interest when I hesitated. I did not con- 
fess because I could not bear to leave a black spot 
in her memory. Please understand that it was too 
painful to me to sprinkle even a drop of ink over 
anything so pure white. 

I, who could not get rid myself of the thought 
of K, was always restless. I tried to bury myself in 
books to drive away my uneasiness, and began to 
work at a terrific pace. I waited for the day when 
I could publish the result of my studies to the world. 
However, this deliberate aim, too, was very painful, 
because it was all false and groundless, and I could 
no longer be absorbed in books. I folded my arms 
again and began to observe the world. 

That my mind was relaxed because there was 


272 


KOKORO 


no need for me to work for daily bread seemed to 
be my wife’s interpretation of my state. It was 
quite natural for her to think so, because she and 
her mother had their own property which was 
enough for them to live on quietly without doing 
anything, and I myself was in no need of a situation. 
Perhaps I was more or less spoilt by this. But the 
chief reason why I became inactive did not lie there 
at all. In the days when I was deceived by my 
uncle, 1 felt it to the marrow of my bones that 
humanity was not to be relied upon, but I still 
trusted myself, all the more because I condemned 
others. Somewhere in my mind was a belief that 
I was a trustworthy fellow, no matter how wicked 
the world was. I suddenly tottered as this belief 
was completely destroyed by K’s death and realized 
that I was exactly the same kind of man as my uncle. 
I, who had been disgusted with other people, was 
now disgusted with myself, and could not move any 
further. 

53 

After finding it impossible to bury myself in 
books, I went through a period in which I tried to 
forget myself by drenching myself in sake. I don’t 
say I like sake. But I could drink it if I tried, and 
so I tried to drink a lot and forget myself in a 
drunken stupor. However, before long, this super- 
ficial means made me more pessimistic. In the 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 273 

midst of dead drunkenness, I suddenly realized what 
I was doing, that 1 was a fool who lied to myself by 
deliberately doing such a thing. Then with a shud- 
der, my eyes and my mind were awakened. Some- 
times I could not even get to this state of drunken 
oblivion, but the more I drank, the more deeply I 
was depressed. Moreover, there was always a melan- 
choly reaction to this unnatural light-heartedness, 
and always 1 had to show this to my most beloved 
wife and her mother. They, on their part, inter- 
preted this in the way most natural to them. 

My wife’s mother seemed to make some un- 
pleasant remarks about me, but my wife kept them 
to herself. On the other hand, she felt she had 
to reproach me herself. 1 say reproach, but she 
never used vehement words, and I was seldom ir- 
ritated by what she said. She entreated me to tell 
her what was wrong with her. Then she advised 
me to stop drinking sake for my future health. 
Sometimes she said, weeping, “ You are a different 
man.” Moreover, she even said, “You mightn’t 
have changed so much if K had been alive.” I 
once replied to her that perhaps that was true, but 
1 was sad because what I meant was completely 
different from what she understood. Yet I could 
not bring myself to explain anything. 

Sometimes I begged my wife’s pardon, on the 
morning after I had come home late, drunk with 
sake . Sometimes she laughed ; sometimes she was 
silent. Rarely tears fell down from her eyes. In 


274 


KOKORO 


any case, I was greatly disgusted with myself. I was 
begging my own forgiveness when I begged my wife’s. 
In the end, I stopped drinking sake. It was because 
I could not stand it any longer, rather than because 
of my wife’s advice. 

I stopped sake. But I did not want to do any- 
thing. The only thing I could do was read. Yet I 
always left the books without attempting to make 
any notes or write anything about them. My wife 
often asked me why I worked. I only laughed bit- 
terly. But in the depth of my heart, I was sad, be- 
cause the only person whom I loved and trusted did 
not understand me. I was sadder when I thought 
I could have made her understand me if I had been 
brave enough. I was lonely. I often felt that I 
was entirely by myself, away from everything in the 
world. 

At the same time I thought of the cause of K’s 
death over and over again. At the time when he 
died, my observation had been simple and diredt, 
because my mind was obsessed by the idea of love. 
I had immediately decided that K died because of 
his disappointed love. But as my mind became 
calmer, I began to think that it was not so simple. 
The conflict between the ideal and the reality came 
into my mind, but this, too, was not enough. Final- 
ly I began to wonder if he was so lonely (like me) 
that he committed suicide, and I shuddered, as the 
foreboding that I was walking along the same road 
as K crossed my heart like an icy wind. 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 275 


Then my wife’s mother became ill. The dodtor 
said that there was no hope of her recovery. I did 
all I could to nurse her. This was for the sick 
woman’s sake as well as for my beloved wife’s, but 
even more for humanity’s sake. Even before this 
I longed to do something, but was compelled to be 
an idle spectator, because there was nothing for me 
to do. Inactive and cut off from the world, I felt 
for the first time that I had done something good. 
I think I was moved by what might be called a 
spirit of penance. 

My mother-in-law died, and my wife and I were 
left alone. My wife told me that she had nobody 
whom she could count on in this world except me. 
1, who could not rely even on myself, was almost 
moved to tears, and thought that my wife was an 
unhappy woman, and even said so. She asked me 
why — she could not see what 1 meant ; and I could 
not explain it to her. She wept, and said resent- 
fully that it was because I had always been a per- 
verse observer of her that such a remark escaped 
from me. 

After my mother-in-law’s death, I treated my 
wife as kindly as possible, not only because I loved 
her, but also because of a feeling which had a wider 
background than the love for a single individual. 
It seemed that my heart had been touched in the 
same way as when I had nursed my mother-in-law. 


276 


KOKORO 


My wife looked happy. Yet somewhere in her con- 
tentment seemed to lurk a vague yearning caused 
by her inability to understand me. However, even 
if she could have understood me, this feeling of 
something lacking might rather have been increased 
than decreased. For it seems to me that more 
strongly than a man a woman prefers that kindness, 
which is offered to her to the exclusion of every- 
body else and even at the expense of the sense of 
duty, to that bigger humanitarian love. 

Once she asked me why a man and a woman 
could not achieve a sympathetic communion with 
each other. I gave a vague answer, saying that it 
might be possible when they were young. She 
seemed to look back to her past and then heaved a 
faint sigh. 

From that time a horrible foreboding began to 
oppress my heart. At first the foreboding happened 
to come upon my heart from outside. I was sur- 
prised, and shivered. Then after a while, my heart 
itself began to respond to this horrible oppression, 
till it began to seem that it had been lurking in the 
depth of my heart from birth. I wondered if any- 
thing had gone wrong with my mind whenever I 
felt like this. Yet I could not bring myself to see 
a dodror or to consult anybody else. 

Only I deeply felt man’s sin. This drove me 
to K’s grave every month, and made me nurse my 
wife’s mother. Again this feeling ordered me to 
be kind to my wife. Urged by this same feeling, I 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


277 


even wished to be whipped by mere strangers in the 
street. As I went through these stages, I began to 
feel that I ought to whip myself rather than wait to 
be whipped, that rather than whipping myself, I 
ought to kill myself. Not knowing what to do, I 
made up my mind to live on as a man already dead. 

How many years passed after 1 had made that 
decision ! My wife and I loved each other as much 
as ever. We were never unhappy : we were happy. 
But it seems that my wife always felt a shadow of 
the blackest hue in this one thing in me — the thing 
which to me, too, was so serious. I feel very sorry 
for her when I think of this. 

55 

My mind, which had decided to live on as a 
man already dead, often jumped up at incitements 
from the outer world. But as soon as I began to 
think of breaking my way towards some field of 
work, a tremendous power appeared from some- 
where, and, gripping my mind, made me unable to 
move an inch. Then it said to me in an oppressive 
tone that I was a man who had no right to do any- 
thing. At these words I at once lost all energy. 
After a while I would try to pull myself together, 
when instantly that power would wring me. Clench- 
ing my teeth, I would cry aloud and ask why it 
stood in my way. Then the mysterious power 
would laugh coldly and say that 1 myself knew the 



278 


KOKORO 


reason too well, which would deprive me again of 
all my strength. 

Please bear it in your mind that there has al- 
ways been this agonizing struggle in me who out- 
wardly continued to lead such a monotonous event- 
less life. How many times more acutely did I suffer 
from that chagrin than my poor wife ! I began to 
feel that at the moment when I could no longer sit 
still in this prison — when I found it utterly impos- 
sible to break my way through, it was all I could do 
to commit suicide which after all required the least 
bit of effort. Perhaps you would say “ Why ? ” with 
wide wondering eyes, but that mysterious horrible 
power, which always came to wring my heart, left 
only the way to death free for me, while it checked 
my activity in every other direction. It might have 
been a different matter if I could have stayed im- 
movable. But so long as I was to advance even a 
little bit, there was no other way for me to take 
but the one to death. 

Several times before I thought of taking the 
easiest direction that my destiny offered me. But 
always I gave up the thought for my wife’s sake. 
Certainly I had not courage to take my wife with 
me. I, who could not confess everything to her to 
relieve my soul, could not even think about such 
violent conduct as sacrificing her life for me. As I 
have my destiny, my wife has her own. It seemed 
extremely cruel and unnatural to throw our lives 
together into the fire. 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 279 

At the same time, 1 imagined the solitary figure 
of my wife left alone. Her words after the death 
of her mother — that she had nobody in the world 
except me — impressed me so much that they sank 
deeply into my memory. 1 always hesitated, and 
was glad of my hesitation whenever I looked at her 
face. Then I stood still, utterly unable to do any- 
thing, and felt my wife’s unsatisfied glances. 

Remember. I have been living in this way. 
My mood when I met you for the first time was not 
much different from the one when we walked in 
the suburbs. There was always black shadow fol- 
lowing me. I have, as it were, been letting my life 
drag on for my wife’s sake. My condition was the 
same when you went back home after your gradua- 
tion. I did not intentionally lie when I said to you 
that we should see each other again in September. 
I really thought so. I was sure to see you again 
even after autumn, and even at the end of next 
winter. 

Then in the height of summer the Emperor 
Meiji died. I felt as if the spirit of Meiji began 
with the Emperor and came to an end with his death. 
The thought that it would be anachronistic for us, 
who had been most strongly influenced by the Mei- 
ji spirit, to survive the Emperor struck my bosom 
with a strong force. I said this to my wife. She 
did not take my words seriously, but suddenly said 
in a joking manner that I had better follow the 
Emperor to the grave. 


280 


KOKORO 


56 

I had almost forgotten this phrase — to follow 
one’s lord to the grave. It seems that this phrase 
which everyday life seldom necessitated had sunk 
deep down in my memory and had begun to rot 
there. When my wife’s teasing reminded me of it, 
I replied that I should follow the spirit of Meiji to 
the grave if ever I were to commit self-immolation. 
This reply, too, was not meant seriously, but at that 
moment I felt as if I could give a new meaning to 
this old useless expression. 

About a month passed. On the evening of 
the Emperor’s funeral I sat in my study as usual 
and heard the signal gun. To me it sounded as a 
signal announcing the passing for good of the Meiji 
Era. Later I found that it had also marked General 
Nogi’s death. With an extra edition of the news- 
paper in my hands I unconsciously repeated to my 
wife, “ He followed the Emperor to the grave.” 

I read in the newspapers the notes that General 
Nogi had written before his death. As I read the 
part where he referred to an incident during the 
Seinan War — the incident in which the flag he held 
was taken away by the enemy — I involuntarily bent 
my fingers and counted the years in which he lived 
on with the resolution to die, for ever since then 
he had been wishing to die to atone for this blunder. 
The Seinan War took place in the tenth year of 
Meiji, and so there are thirty-five years between that 


THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 


281 


i time and now. General Nogi had been waiting 
these thirty-five years for an opportunity to die. I 
J wondered which was more painful to such a person, 
1 the thirty-five years that he lived or that one moment 
when he thrust his sword into his stomach. 

| Two or three days afterwards I finally made up 

j my mind to commit suicide. Perhaps you will find 

| it difficult to grasp clearly the cause which drives 

i me to death, just as I cannot fully understand the 

i reason why Nogi died. If so, this comes from the 

i difference of opinion brought about by the different 

’ ages people live in, and cannot be helped. Perhaps 

i it may be more accurate to say that this comes from 

the differences of character with which each indi- 
1 vidual was born. At any rate, I believe I have said 
everything I wished to say, doing my best to make 
you understand me — a puzzling person. 

I am leaving my wife behind me. It is fortunate 
that she has enough to live on when I am gone. I 
don’t like to give her a cruel terror, so am intending 
to die without showing her my blood — shall try to 
disappear from this world stealthily before phe 
notices it. I should like her to think that I died 
suddenly. I shall feel satisfied even if she associates 
my death with insanity. 

It is more than ten days since I made up my 
j mind to commit suicide. Please understand that I 
i have spent most of the time in writing this long 
autobiography for you. At first I meant to see you 
l and tell you all this, but now that I have written it 



282 


KOKORO 


down I am glad because I feel I have expressed my- 
self more clearly by this method. I have not written 
this through mere whim. My past which has pro- 
duced me cannot be clarified as a part of man’s ex- 
perience by anyone except me, so I feel that my 
effort to record it truthfully may not prove to be a 
waste of energy to you and to other people, in that 
it will be of some help to an understanding of 
humanity. 1 heard just recently that Watanabe 
Kazan postponed the day of his death for a week in 
order to finish his picture called Kantan. Perhaps 
this may be interpreted by outsiders as a superfluous 
act, but it may also be said that the person involved 
could not help it because he had his own need in 
his mind. My effort was not only prompted by my 
sense of obligation to you, but more than half of it 
came from my own need. 

However, I have satisfied my need, and there 
is nothing else for me to do. By the time this letter 
reaches you, I shall no longer be in this world, I 
shall be dead. My wife went to her aunt’s in Ichi- 
gaya about ten days ago and so is not at home. I 
advised her to go because her aunt had been ill and 
needed help. I have written most of this long 
letter while my wife was away. When she came 
home (as she did occasionally), I immediately hid it. 

I am intending to make my past, good and bad, 
public property. But please understand that my 
wife is the only exception. I don’t want to tell her 
anything at all. My only wish is to keep her memory 



THE SENSEI AND HIS LAST LETTER 

of the past as pure as possible, so as long ai 
wife is alive please keep everything I have told 
in your mind as a secret confided to you only. 



About Soseki Natsume and Kokaro 

Soseki Natsume was bom in Tokyo in 1867. After his 
graduation from the Imperial University of Tokyo, where 
he specialized in English literature, he taught at various 
schools, married, and in 1900 was sent by the government 
to England to study. On coming home at the beginning 
of 1903, he was given a lectureship at the First High School 
and also at the Imperial University of Tokyo, and held it 
till 1907, when he decided to devote his whole energy to 
novel writing and came to be connected with the Asahi, 
one of the outstanding newspapers. 

Sosekfs creative genius first found its vent in haiku 
poetry, under the stimulation of Shiki Masaoka, an eminent 
haiku poet who was his school-mate. However, with the 
production of W agahai wa Nelco de Aru (I Am a Cat), his 
first novel, in 1905, he began definitely to concentrate his 
efforts on prose. At about the same time, he produced 
his highly romantic short stories ; then in 1906 Botchan (A 
Greenhorn) and Kusa-Makura (The Grass-Pillow) were pub- 
lished. In 1907 Qubijinso (The Poppy) and Kofu (A Mine- 
Worker) appeared in serial form in the Asahi ; in 1908, 
Sanshiro ; in 1909, Sorekara (And Then) ; in 1910, Man 
(The Gate) ; in 1912, Higan Sugi Made (Till After the Spring 
Equinox) ; in 1913, Kojin (Passers-By) ; in 1914, Kokoro ; in 
1915, M ichikusa {Loitering). He was in the midst of writ- 
ing Meian (Light and Shade), his last unfinished novel, 


£85 


286 ABOUT SOSEKI NATSUME AND KOKORO 

when ulcer of the stomach, from which he had continually 
been suffering for the last several years, returned again, and 
he died in December, 1916* 

From the time of Wagahai <wa Neko de Am to that 
of Meian Soseki developed so greatly that it would appear 
impossible to try to make a summary of his works as a 
whole in such a short note as this. Yet varied as his works 
are, the same nucleus seems to be heart and centre of all 
his works ; and this is Soseki as a man in relation to his 
surroundings. In his earlier works, especially in Kusa - 
Makura , Soseki almost deliberately seeks the world of beauty, 
of poetry, and of dream as opposed to that of naked ugly 
reality. This is because to him in those days novel writing 
stood for an escape from the pressure of life. However, once 
when he realizes the impossibility of this attitude and makes 
up his mind to grapple with reality (as is revealed in his 
letter of October 26th, 1906), he starts to revolve the ques- 
tions that have constantly haunted him, with his charac- 
teristic detachment and intellectual control but with ruth- 
less concentration. It may be said, therefore, that his 
works from Sanshiro onwards are simply the deepening of 
one theme. In the trilogy of Sanshiro , Sorekara , and Mon, 
he deals with the romantic love which attracts the two 
strangers like a magnet as well as the enigma of life that 
does not bring the lovers together (Sanshiro), the triumph 
of this love over conventional morality and social law 
(Sorekara), and its consequences, that is to say, the over- 
shadowed life of the couple (Mon). In Higan Sugi Made, 
he creates the character of Sunaga with a passion that has 
not hitherto been felt in his works, and in Sunaga’s trouble 
is deepened Sanshiro’s vaguely-felt mental conflict. Thus 


ABOUT SOSEKI NATSUME AND KOKORO 


287 


the character of Soseki himself is more and more brought 
forward as he goes on writing, and it may be said he is 
revolving the question of how to live, in other words, the 
problem of human relationships, in these works. In Kojin 
is presented another Sunaga in still deeper agonies, and the 
problem of human relationships is dealt with still more 
exclusively. The suffering of the hero of Kojin chiefly 
originates from his overscrupulous sensibility to, and his 
inability to tolerate, what is ugly and false, and this is a 
direct reflection of Sosekfs own state of mind as is shown 
in his letter of October 5th, 1913. 

In this respect Kokoro forms an exact antithesis to Ko- 
jin. If in Kojin Soseki makes his hero persist in his self- 
asserting attitude, in Kolwro he deals with a man who, be- 
cause of his painful past experiences, has come to deny 
himself through and through. Here lies the significance 
of Kokoro as it stands in Soseki’ s whole works. When he 
has finished Kokoro , an evolution is brought about in So- 
sekfs mind, and that superb novel Michikusa is produced. 

The word kokoro is an extremely difficult one to trans- 
late : the meanings of mind, heart, soul and spirit seem to 
be all contained in this single word, and yet it is not simply 
heart, or soul, or spirit. As the French translation* of this 
novel gives it, “ the human heart ” may perhaps be nearest 
to what Soseki meant by this word. The translator, how- 
ever, thought it best to leave the word as it is. 

Soseki, who confessed that the intricate tenacious 
character of Sunaga — the character which he likened to a 


*Horiguchi Daigaku et Georges Bonneau : Kokoro (Le Pauvre 
Coeur Des Hommes), Paris, 1939. 






288 


ABOUT SOSEKI NATSUME AND KOKORO 


Western oil-painting — was his, had always a longing for 
those simple strokes of Japanese paintings. With the heart 
of the artist in Kusa^Makura, he often turned to composing 
haiku and painting pictures in the style of the Southern 
Chinese school, or in that simple haiga style. The illust- 
ration given in this book is the one done in 1916, and is an 
example of the latter. 


t 

? 

i 


be ft i * A ^ A ^ H t B pp m 

® ft + a ¥ -a m h a m n 

* Si + -fc #S - £ tf* S H # ^ 

« m + a ^ a 1 1 s b h m m n 


| KOKORO 4^1 r^J 4 > 

| CffiSC^Scgg in 21056 II) 

I ; ' : ^ 0 :KM^i 

i ■'. , ; :■.;■■■■■■ :■■■■ ■ •:.' ;.:■ 

! : ; ; ..■.■■'.■.:'■• ■■■■■■:. 


* # * x 0 m s 

■»• t -9 

» * ft I ii' to f 

s$ tr * 4 > ± # ® 

mscflriiPEBfflsffHT a 

S!3 £9 * m * EP ©J ffi 

nacnr»fiai*ttWHT a +=»*& 

cmsn 3355 ^ Oi & m 

* » * * M S * J£ 

B & Si JR * M # §£ 130037 

3Km®i9BB®ffiRrHTa+z®fls 

THE HOKUSEI DO PRESS 
KANDA, TOKYO, NIPPON 

m & it 0 

IMfflSWiT B 


S fl & K II A ^ I @ 

msi 

^ It SSiRSft££g 



